Alby finally took a deep breath, then looked at each of them in turn.
"Holy …," he breathed, looking around at nothing in particular.
"Someone … help … me!" he screamed; each word ripped his throat raw.
As he did so, he pulled one of his knives from a pocket and, without missing a beat, cut a big piece of ivy off the wall.
"Not much here that sounds very good.
Apparently Minho’s pronouncement had already been whispered through the ranks, because the first thing Newt said was "Well, we knew we’d have to fight.
What’s going on?""The Box, shuck-face, the Box!" was all Alby said before he set off for the middle of the Glade at a brisk pace that almost looked to Thomas like panic.
"Thomas didn’t bother wasting his own breath on questions; he just kept running, following Minho.
Next, you become one of the first people ever to survive an entire night outside the Glade, and to top it all off you kill four Grievers.
All our names are just stupid nicknames they made up—like Alby for Albert Einstein, Newt for Isaac Newton, and me—Thomas.
The only sounds were the muffled sobs of Ben, who kept wiping at his nose and eyes.
No sun, no supplies, no protection from the Grievers.
"Thomas sighed.
Thomas forced himself to talk.
Two nights in a row only one boy had been taken, and people had started to believe that what Gally had said was true.
The night dragged on, the heavy sense of anticipation like a weight on his chest.
""They?" Thomas didn’t like the malicious way the boy had said the word.
He stepped forward, wanting to see the Maze for himself, as if the answers were printed on the walls out there.
The Griever’s spikes appeared again; it surged ahead and another arm popped out of its skin and shot forward, this one with huge claws, snapping to grab the spear.
The corridor didn’t end in another stone wall.
Thomas had the sickening thought that Gally looked like someone about to commit murder.
Near that, maybe twenty feet to the south, stood a squat building made of rough concrete blocks, a menacing iron door its only entrance—there were no windows.
And then he was being pulled away by Minho and Newt, his arms still flailing even when they only hit air.
" He looked behind him, hoping to see Alby somewhere.
"You don’t know Gally, but he’s a psycho kid who ran away.
At one point people outside rushed the bus, their clothes ratty, hair matted to their heads, strange sores like those Thomas had seen on the woman covering their terrified faces.
" Then, for some reason, he looked straight at Thomas.
Some instinct took over his actions and without saying anything he turned away from Alby and walked to a nearby tree, where he plopped down to sit with his back against the rough bark.
You might be a shuck-faced slinthead, but you ain’t evil.
Minho slowed at the corner, then stopped, holding up a hand to tell Thomas and the others to do the same.
All in an attempt to find those capable of helping us find a way to beat the Flare.
His eyes were laced with something dark—almost a sick fascination.
He felt the slightest hint of peace, as fleeting as it was, and tried to enjoy it for however long it might last.
Always knew he was crazy.
Despite his own curiosity, Thomas didn’t bother trying to force his way through to get a look— the bodies were too tightly squeezed together.
And not just her looks, but the way she walked, her mannerisms—stiff, without a hint of joy.
"The Runners have always compared these day to day, looking to see if there was a pattern that would somehow help figure out a way to an exit.
Thomas awoke to a weak, lifeless light.
"The bugger should be sleepin’ for a couple of days, then wake up okay.
Thomas quickly looked away.
Thomas swung to the right several more times before he dared to look back.
I don’t see any doors.
Just keep moving.
He’d just rounded a corner to the right when he slammed to a stop, his feet almost skidding out from under him.
Once he and Teresa were done helping, they went to the secret spot in the Deadheads to strategize about the station inside the Griever Hole and how they planned to punch in the code.
And none of the kids in the Glade had a clue, either—at least, they weren’t sharing if they did.
" Again, the almost-smile.
But we’ve yet to see an exit open up that will lead us out of the square.
That means he has memories, and he said the Greenie looks familiar.
"Ben!"Thomas looked toward the voice, surprised to see Alby standing at the edge of the graveyard, a mere phantom in the fading light.
He wore nothing but shorts, his whiter-than-white skin stretched across his bones like a sheet wrapped tightly around a bundle of sticks.
And the walls of the corridors were similar to those that surrounded the Glade, the ground made of the same massive stone blocks as in the courtyard.
The walls of the Door were only seconds from sealing shut.
He could only imagine how truly horrific a place like this could be if everyone went lazy and stupid.
Start stompin’ around this place yappin’ about how you’re too good to work like a peasant, how you’re all nice and ready to be a Runner—you’ll make plenty of enemies.
"Thomas had already gotten up; he leaned over Minho’s shoulder and took a look.
The edges that bordered the vast opening were smooth, except for one odd, repeating pattern on both sides.
Can’t take a chance that one day, in one spot, somewhere, an exit might appear.
Thomas didn’t need to look behind him to know the Griever was gaining on him with every passing second.
Thomas’s heart rate quickened—he was now alone with a guy who’d had a bad temper before getting attacked by a Griever and going through the Changing.
Thomas wanted to look down so badly, but knew any movement might give him away.
He looked in every direction but saw only darkness; he felt along the walls again, searching for a way out.
After the briefest hesitation, the Gladers followed, almost stomping each other in their rush to get out of the chamber, as far away from the Grievers and the Maze as possible.
In the third hour, Teresa surprised him, speaking in his mind from back in the Glade.
Thomas had finally stopped crying; he couldn’t help wondering what Minho would think of him, or if he’d tell others, calling him a sissy.
" He paused to gather his thoughts.
So much had happened since arriving, he’d almost forgotten how familiar the Glade had felt to him that first night, sleeping next to Chuck.
Being mostly alone sounded like a great ideaiDoc.
Thomas had to hold in a gasp when he realized it was Gally—he knew that voice already.
" Newt pointed at a notepad on the nightstand.
The night had begun.
They made their way directly to the kitchen, where, despite Frypan’s grumbling, they were able to get cheese sandwiches and raw vegetables.
"What the—""Only seen three Banishments, Tommy.
You’ll be all whacked for a few days, but then you’ll get used to this place.
Teresa?She was gone.
"Well, you look familiar to me and you claim we’re friends.
" It especially terrified him to think about Chuck and Teresa out there—he’d faced the Grievers down already and knew all too well what it was like.
A heavy grating sound revealed double sliding doors being forced open.
"We’ll see how you feel after running your guts out.
Two hours after that he started to think having dinner with Gally and the Grievers would beat sitting inside that stupid Slammer.
" Tom, we’re the last ones.
But certain lines in the middle—lines that happened to appear more often than any other—made a slightly darker image than the rest.
"Newt!" he called out, running to catch up.
How could a maze, with walls so massive and tall, be so big that dozens of kids hadn’t been able to solve it after who knew how long trying?
""Yeah, you looked it yesterday.
You really think we’ve never had the ingenious thought of climbing the freaking walls?"For the first time, Thomas felt anger creeping in to compete with his fear and panic.
Someone lowered a rope from above, the end of it tied into a big loop.
"Thomas took a long swig of water, looking up at the ivy-covered wall opposite them.
The memory made him queasy; he hoped Alby was completely healed from the ordeal so he didn’t have to witness something like that again—the sickly skin, the veins, the thrashing.
Thomas half stood as he watched the Glader crash down into his chair, tipping it over backward, cracking it in two pieces.
The latter hadn’t said a word since Thomas had entered the room; he just sat there, drooped in his chair, looking like he hadn’t slept in a week.
"No one said you couldn’t.
"Thomas?" Chuck asked, lightly tapping him on the upper arm.
"Cheerful, don’t ya think?" Newt said, mirroring his thoughts exactly.
After a minute or so, he gave up and turned to sit with his back against the wall.
"No questions till the end, shank.
Someone get help!"Nobody moved, and deep inside, Thomas knew why.
"He expected questions—an eruption of voices—but the room was dead silent.
What you said about the two of us and what we did to them… It was true?We did some bad things, Teresa .
"Don’t you have some sloppin’ to do?" He looked from Chuck to Thomas.
Finally Gally backed away, half stumbling toward the exit behind him.
He remembered Chuck’s story about the boy who’d tried to rappel down the dark hole of the Box after it had descended, only to be cut in two by something slicing through the air.
"Alby looked at Teresa.
One, two, three!" He grunted with effort, heaved him over toward the Hole.
Sooner than Thomas expected, Teresa had found him and was sitting next to him, her body pressed against his despite plenty of room on the bench.
The thick leaves of the ivy served well as handholds, and Thomas was elated to find that the many cracks in the stone wall were perfect supports for his feet as he climbed.
Every last one of them might be waiting for us when we get to the Cliff —the beetle blades are out there constantly.
"Just one a night?
The Doors were closing for the night.
"Hey, you shucks are the ones giving me all the pep talks.
First, you go out in the Maze when you’re not supposed to, at night.
Heco paused as if expecting Thomas to be impressed.
""Is this a prison?" Thomas asked; he dug in the darkness of his thoughts, trying to find a crack to his past.
But now, no longer surrounded, Thomas had a clear shot away, back down the path.
The Runners had to be in almost superhuman shape to do what they did every day.
" Thomas forced a grin, though he cringed at the thought of hanging out in the Slammer by himself all day before he got to start.
They always refuse.
An hour ago, he’d thought he’d never hear such a sound come out of his mouth again.
""Those main corridors right outside the Doors don’t ever change.
No one came, no one bothered him.
He’d recovered quickly, and ran now with almost no effort, despite nearing the end of his second hour of running.
"Get out!"Newt’s face sank in obvious hurt—Thomas was surprised to see no anger there.
Alby and Newt had reached the crowd and pushed themselves to the front, standing right over the doors that led to the Box.
When we’re done, you and I’ll talk.
Seeing who’d survive it all.
Minho nodded and faced the crowd.
He forced himself to walk forward, trying to seem innocent without acting like someone who was guilty who was trying to act innocent.
What if each day is a separate piece of the code, and they’re supposed to use all eight sections together somehow?""You think maybe each day is trying to reveal a word?" Teresa asked.
"Greenie, what’re you yappin’ about?"Ever since Thomas had seen the words on the wall of the Maze—world in catastrophe, killzone experiment department—he’d been thinking about them.
Free time, meals, goin’ to sleep at night, as you walk around, train, work.
He was almost positive the smell would bring back some sort of pleasant memory, but nothing came.
"Who’s that!" yelled the boy from the bathroom, his voice scratchy and laced with anger.
A few minutes passed, various Griever sounds penetrating the walls every ten to twenty seconds.
Thomas looked up, squinting to see that the sun was finally visible, though it looked odd—more orange than it should be.
Thomas thought he could see bright flashes of light far away, bouncing off the night sky.
" Thomas felt his mouth drop open—felt anger redden his face.
With open Doors and no sunset, there’s no point in coming back here, anyway.
Thomas took it all in with a distant and muted wonder—he was far past being surprised or overcome by anything ever again.
Completely creeped out, Thomas leaned closer to get a better look anyway, curious.
"Tommy?" Newt asked, stepping closer with a look of concern creasing his forehead.
"He paused, perhaps expecting Thomas to ask what he meant.
"Thomas was more than happy to get away from the house, and headed back toward the tree.
His arms fell to his sides as he turned, looking around the Glade for a sign of Ben, trepidation building within him as he wondered what the boy would do when he saw him.
We’ve heard it too many times now to deny it, and it’s time to discuss it.
I quit bothering to look at ’em a long time ago.
He swayed back and forth, switching the knife from hand to hand, eyes glued on Thomas.
It took every ounce of his willpower, but he looked directly into Gally’s eyes, never breaking contact.
Seeing it all, seeing the beds and the dressers, all made up and fresh—the sense of normalcy was almost overwhelming.
And all of them were killed in ways you don’t wanna hear about.
"And you think we can fight off Grievers?
His heart skipped a beat when a boy unexpectedly appeared around a corner up ahead, entering the main passage from one of the offshoots to the right, running toward him and the Glade.
Everyone just likes to call ’em Baggers.
If there’s some kind of magical exit, hopefully it’ll work with rocks, too— make them disappear.
Newt was one of them, as was Minho, confirming Thomas’s guess that he was the Keeper of the Runners.
"Say one more thing like that and I’ll break your neck, right here in front of everybody.
The only decorations in sight were a dusty vase on a three-legged table and a black-and -white picture of an ancient woman dressed in an old-fashioned white dress.
At every turn, they slowed so the Keeper could look around the corner first.
We’ve always thought that comparing these day to day, week to week, would help us figure out a pattern.
In doing so, she was forced to turn right at every turn, and the simple laws of physics and geometry ensured that eventually she found the exit.
The torso was a silver cylinder, maybe three inches in diameter and ten inches long.
"We were so worried about the stupid code words, we didn’t think to look around for something to push—the last word, the last piece of the puzzle.
"It sounds like someone’s dying in there.
With one last violent effort, Ben was finally able to twist his neck in the circle of leather so that his whole body turned to face the Gladers.
"Just seein’ off Minho and Alby—they’re going to look at the buggin’ dead Griever.
"What were you doing, idiot!"Minho waited until he made it back through the Door, then bent over, hands on his knees, and sucked in a few breaths before answering.
Frozen, Thomas watched as one of the Griever’s long arms reached for the lifeless body.
He was so relieved he almost couldn’t speak.
Hoped it, anyway —he was really starting to like her.
"Did ya remember somethin’?"Thomas ignored him, looked around the room in confusion, knowing he’d heard a voice, then back at the girl.
They saw the Griever before they’d even made it to the door leading from Section Eight to Section One.
It looked as if she’d been erased from existence with one quick swipe.
I want to know who I am just as much as anyone else.
Only a few seconds later, the group parted again, and Newt was pointing straight at Thomas.
Same thing happens out in the Maze—those walls shift every night, too.
"Thanks for the tip you gave us after the Changing—to protect them.
Then he remembered that no one else knew what Alby had said after Newt left the room—before the seizure.
He heard a shriek as he passed by, a throat- scorching wail that could only mean the Glader had lost the fight, met a horrific end.
Teresa and Chuck bumped into him, almost sending all three of them to an endless fall.
"No, we’re just training you—someone’ll probably want a break.
Thomas jumped on the one holding Dave, tried to jerk the kid free, hoping the creature would retaliate.
Chuck found him, and the look of fear on the boy’s face pinched Thomas’s heart.
They’re the ones accusing you of stuff.
Minho was holding out a couple of pairs of tightly cut underwear, made from a shiny white material.
It was low and bleak, almost a mumble.
Thomas slid down the rough face of the tree until he sat on the ground again; he shrank back against the bark and closed his eyes, wishing he could wake up from this terrible, terrible dream.
"Oddly, Alby almost looked disappointed.
"Everything has gone according to plan, Mr.
Newton.
Harsh sounds of chains and pulleys, like the workings of an ancient steel factory, echoed through the room, bouncing off the walls with a hollow, tinny whine.
He looked at Teresa, who shifted from foot to foot, wringing her hands.
Another stab of pain sliced through Thomas’s head—there were too many things to compute at once.
He grabbed him, pulled him back into his arms, ignoring the blood, ignoring the frozen look of death on the boy’s face.
Battles clashed on both sides of them; Thomas refused to look, refused to help.
" Minho righted himself from leaning on the wall, hit Alby on the arm, then started walking toward the Homestead with a slight limp.
Thomas rolled over, glad it was dark so no one could see the look that had settled across his face.
"Minho finished drawing, then looked up at the special spot.
I don’t know anyone.
It was horrible—way worse than we have it here.
Minho turned and faced the huddled group of Gladers.
"Get me away from these guys," Thomas said.
And we did—the mazes basically repeat themselves about every month.
Minho took off running in the direction where he’d seen the Griever.
Why would he make that up?"Thomas thought about the Changing, and the fact that it brought back memories.
Never go out at night.
" He barely heard himself say it—his thoughts had spun in a new direction.
Explore the walls a little more closely?"Minho shook his head.
They were literally, in every way, inside his mind.
He looked to Thomas more out of place than a carrot on a tomato plant.
Thomas hesitated, feeling one last moment of stark terror—hearing the horrible sounds behind him, seeing the illusion in front of him—then snapped out of it.
Glimmers of an eerie light shone through the window; it cast a wavering spectrum of colors on Newt’s body and face, as if he stood next to a lighted swimming pool.
"There were already other Runners milling about the room, drawing up their Maps when they entered.
Makes one heck of a grinding noise.
Thomas moved up behind him to get a look.
Every night.
As she sucked in a huge breath, her eyes snapped open and she blinked, looking around at the crowd surrounding her.
He was gone.
"Okay, give me the last few days of each section—make piles along the table, in order from Section One to Section Eight.
The walls really move?""What else would I have meant?"Thomas had a hard time wrapping his mind around the possibility.
None of them wore any kind of discernible facial expression—they were all sallow and gaunt, miserably sad to look upon.
It was the one topic that Thomas thought might lead him to answers more than anything else.
The thing had retracted its spikes and arms to enter—when it landed with a squishy thump, a dozen sharp and nasty objects popped back out, looking deadlier than ever.
Almost at once the Grievers had shut down completely, their instruments sucked back through their blubbery skin, their lights turned off, their inside machines dead quiet.
Somehow Ben had already been stung once, which meant he knew better than perhaps anyone just exactly what lay in store for him.
All he could think about was the Grievers, what their purpose could be, what they did out there during the night.
Then he reached up with his hand and lightly tapped on the glass.
Even with that much on his shoulders he had to fight the rising flood of panic he felt.
Thomas almost screamed in frustration, but he kept quiet.
And he just happens to be the first person to survive a night out in the Maze.
"Well … why didn’t you bring it back with you?"Minho laughed again, a half-grunt, half-giggle.
Her right fist shot into the air as she landed, staying rigid after she grew still, pointing toward the sky.
You should be Banished for your embarrassing inability to lead thiDocsgroup.
All he wanted was to be left alone.
One of the Med- jacks was there, the shorter one—Thomas couldn’t remember his name— dropping water into the comatose girl’s mouth a few drips at a time.
Thirty minutes later, Thomas saw one do the exact same thing.
"Since we didn’t make it back before sunset, probably.
The right wall was closing fast, seeming to quicken its pace the more Thomas willed it to slow down.
I can’t—His sentence was cut short by a sudden series of shouts and commotion outside the entrance through which the woman had come.
He slammed into the stone ahead, losing his grip on the vine.
Those shanks’ve seen what happens at night with those bloody Doors open.
"It’s just the walls!"Thomas barely heard him, too fascinated, too shaken by the closing of the Doors.
"Minho glanced at Newt, his eyebrows raised in question.
And he told us what the Council decided about you—one day in the cell, then you’ll enter the Runner training program.
Blinking to clear it away, he suddenly caught the red lights again, flickering and skittering about deep in the darkness of the woods.
""Yeah, see ya," Chuck muttered, then turned to walk away.
Minutes stretched into hours, although it was impossible to know for sure because every second seemed an eternity.
The two of them went into the dusty little room and opened up all the boxes, grabbing a small stack of Maps from each one.
The Griever was charging toward that sky.
The tomb was smaller than usual—only the top half of the deceased person lay inside.
"Anyway, listen to me," Minho continued as he took his seat.
The boys decided to take their lunches to eat outside, and a few minutes later they found themselves at the west wall, looking out at the many work activities going on throughout the Glade, their backs up against a spot of thick ivy.
"Thomas shrank into his chair, hoping that others hadn’t been thinking anything like that.
Then, How could anyone be evil enough to do this to us?
Thomas was too tired to put up a fight.
A lone shape was sprinting across the courtyard of the Glade toward the exit through which Gally had just been taken.
It’s just the ones a little deeper out.
"Minho switched on the light, making Thomas squint for a second until his eyes got used to it.
Thomas looked down and saw nothing but a gray descent.
The red light of its eye was like a little sun, too bright to look at directly.
"Don’t die—fight it.
"Looks like it ends in a slide up there, shooting downward.
It’d been one endless—and strange—day.
He could remember theaters, but not what any specific one looked like.
The dim light hadn’t changed a bit since they’d woken up that morning, and Thomas wondered if anything would change at "sunset" either.
They’d been in the Maze for roughly twenty-four hours.
Thomas pondered the question for a moment.
Chuck annoy you to death?He stood and walked over to another cross, this one almost completely overgrown with weeds, the ground firm at its base.
It had disappeared deep within the foliage—almost as if it had never existed.
He crawled out from under his blanket and eagerly followed his teacher, winding his way through the crowd of Gladers who slept on the lawn, their snores the only sign they weren’t dead.
"He said it quietly enough that Thomas didn’t think anyone else heard, but it sounded ominous.
"Med-jacks, Thomas repeated in his head, a light going off.
"No way—I wanna hear.
He laughed, as if that one act had solved all their problems.
"Look!" someone shouted, but he’d already seen it, his breath catching in his throat.
He surged ahead, pulling his friends.
"Two years, I’ve been here.
"A minute or two passed in silence as Thomas processed the information; they made a couple more turns.
I think someone altered our brains, put something in there so we could do this telepathy thing.
Though the sun had a few hours before hitting the noon spot up above, there was plenty of light to see by.
He was just wishing she’d say something to him when the door from the hallway suddenly whipped open.
To look for who-knew-what.
"We need to be in sync!" Minho yelled, almost drowned out by the earsplitting sounds of the thundering spikes rolling along the stone.
"How can this be happening!" he screamed to the walls, turning in a circle.
He should be punished, but then we need to figure out a way to use him.
But as he jiggled and swayed with the movements of the bus, felt Teresa’s head thump against his shoulder every once in a while when they hit big bumps, heard her stir and fall back to sleep, heard the murmurs of other conversations from other Gladers, his thoughts kept returning to one thing.
"Where am I?" Thomas asked, surprised at hearing his voice for the first time in his salvageable memory.
The head was impossible to see because of the red beam of light shining right at him, though it seemed small, vision its only purpose, perhaps.
I just wanted to see you before I went inside for the night.
Suddenly the leader of the group—perhaps he was seventeen—took a step forward.
He was consumed with curiosity but still felt too ill to look closely at his surroundings.
If I see you again before tomorrow morning, you ain’t reachin’ another one alive.
It was a window into another grave—one that had the dusty remnants of a rotting body.
We can’t handle one Griever on our own ground, much less fight a whole horde of them in their little hole.
The Maze couldn’t be solved.
The end result looked to Thomas like an army of drunk guys had done the work, but it was solid enough.
He sensed light on the other side of his eyelids, but knew it would be unbearable to open them.
"Now everyone keep their bloody mouths shut, I mean it.
A normal maze’d be hard enough—but when it changes every night, couple of mental mistakes and you’re spendin’ the night with vicious beasts.
His clothes were tattered, barely hanging on; a bloody, thick bandage covered half his head and face.
He sensed frustration from her, like she had a million questions and no idea where to start.
He pictured them in his mind as he picked at his eggs and bacon with a fork, speaking to no one, not even Chuck, who ate silently next to him.
Did the Grievers come last night?"Newt paused, darkness passing over his face.
What if he made accusations like Ben had?
"And that Runner makes a Map every day, and then compares it to Maps from previous days, for that section.
As for Thomas and the rest of those committed to the escape, there was a ton of work to be done.
He made it to the East Door and sprinted through it, out of the Glade.
They always come out at night.
I’m almost done, she replied.
"Anything at all?"Thomas didn’t respond, kept looking, willing his mind to break down the memory barrier and seek out this girl from his past.
"There’s no exit, never was, never will be.
"We need your help in the Griever Hole, in case one of those things is in there waiting for us.
"Thomas barely heard Newt, having seen Alby sulking over to the side, away from the main group of the Gladers, alone.
Even the flashlights seemed to get swallowed by the darkness.
Thomas ignored him, more interested than ever in the outside of the Glade.
He doesn’t even look human anymore.
He wasn’t in the least bit surprised at the non-answer.
Ignoring the gaping stares of everyone at the bottom—especially Gally—he walked out the door, pulling Chuck by the arm as he did so.
But deep down, he held on to the hope that he could fight long enough for someone to punch in the code and shut down the Grievers before they killed him.
In front of him, through the East Door, he could make out passages leading to the left, to the right, and straight ahead.
"That’s ridiculous!" He faced Newt and pointed back at Minho, who had taken his seat again.
Earlier, Minho and a couple of Runners had pulled out ropes of ivy and knotted them to vines still attached to the walls.
Asking them to fight the Grievers was asking a lot.
He caught glimpses of ropes and chains and other odds and ends as Minho’s flashlight crisscrossed the closet.
"Thomas’s thoughts tried to drift toward the Hole and what it all meant, but he couldn’t shake the thought of what Newt had been about to say before they saw Minho return.
He heard the twisted animal-machines come closer, so close, waiting on the stone blocks below.
"Get a nice view out the window this morning?"Thomas stood, hoping the time for answers had come—or maybe hoping for a distraction from his gloomy thoughts.
He’d been so quiet, his voice sounded odd, especially with the hollow echo the Maze walls created.
"Newt found you last night and told everyone to let you sleep.
Then, in unison, the monsters moved forward, slowly, instrument-tipped appendages unfolding, pointed at Thomas and the Gladers, ready to kill.
More than anything, he just wanted Ben gone, wanted it all to be over.
Before twilight faded to blackness, he was already in his new favorite spot in the forest corner, curled up against the ivy, wondering if he could ever run again.
The Keeper sighed.
Before long eighteen boys had joined Thomas and his friends in the tunnel, making a total of twenty-one Gladers in all.
Countless others stared.
That’s one of the reasons we run this place all nice and busylike.
He knew it was dangerous, but the idea of actually fighting the Grievers—not just running from them—was terrifying.
Newt and Alby, who finally felt well enough to walk around again, his head heavily bandaged, insisted on a plan for everyone to rotate where they slept each night.
And whatever it was, to Thomas it meant one thing: the fact they could no longer see the sun probably meant they’d never been able to in the first place.
Both Gally and Minho looked as if the taut, red skin of their faces was about to burst—but they finally broke their stare.
"Thomas was quiet as he and Minho got their things ready and ate a lightning-fast breakfast.
They made good time—Thomas was glad for his wristwatch, with the skies being gray—because it quickly became obvious that the walls hadn’t moved from the day before.
"Alby looked like he’d been slapped in the face.
Minho had been the first to exit, which made Thomas wonder if he was the Keeper of the Runners.
""I believe this klunk about as much as I believe Frypan’s food is good for you," Winston grumbled, looking tired and indifferent.
Escorted into the Homestead by a couple of Med-jacks, up the stairs, a glimpse through a barely ajar door of someone feeding the comatose girl in her bed—he felt an incredibly strong urge to go see her, to check on her—into their own rooms, into bed, food, water, bandages.
For some reason, he was different from everyone else in the Glade.
But the reality of the situation sank like a stone in his belly.
In fact, the desire to become a Runner was the only thing driving him on, helping him accept his predicament.
Now only a few feet away, the visitor grew louder and louder until Thomas caught a shadowed glimpse of a skinny boy limping along in a strange, lilting run.
Minho was a few feet ahead of Thomas.
Then there were the walls closing and dinner.
The Gladers had been expecting something from the window, not from behind them.
"There is, of course, one final Variable.
What’s that supposed to mean?"Before Thomas could answer, the faint memory of last night, before he fell asleep, came to him, Teresa’s words inside his mind.
Thomas held his breath, not daring to make the slightest sound.
But even with the ever-increasing light, he still couldn’t tell what was down there.
Newt looked at him.
"They should’ve come back hours ago.
It also shuts down the Grievers so they can’t follow us—if we can just survive long enough to get to that point.
Minho forced a bitter laugh, then knelt back on the ground beside Alby.
"What’s that?" he asked, leaning in for a better look.
And consumed by curiosity, by a fleeting hope, Thomas joined her, collapsing to the ground to get a better look.
The creature was a horrific mix of animal and machine, and seemed to realize it was being observed, seemed to know what lay inside the walls of the Glade, seemed to want to get inside and feast on human flesh.
"Now who’s the one giving up?"Minho’s head snapped up so quickly, Thomas took a step backward.
"Nothing new?""Just the usual changes to the way we got here—day’s half over," Minho replied as he looked at his watch emotionlessly.
"Well … he has been through the Changing—Griever stung him in the middle of the day just outside the West Door.
""No way," Newt said.
Chuck was in charge of filling water bottles and getting them out to everyone.
""What do you think it means?" Intensely interested, he tried to block out the shouts and chatter rumbling through the Glade as others found out about the Map Room being burned.
It knows I’m done, he thought.
The clearing was small, maybe thirty square feet, and covered with a thick layer of leafy weeds growing close to the ground.
"What happened?" The childlike look of hope on his face broke Thomas’s heart—he obviously thought they’d found something important.
A metallic clicking sound from the branches above grabbed his attention, made him look up; a flash of silver and red light caught his eyes just before disappearing around the trunk to the other side.
Thomas conveniently finds himself in the Maze for the night, then tries to convince everyone he’s a hero.
One by one he heard the Gladers’ dwindling shouts and hoots up ahead.
"But before Teresa could answer, Newt was running out of the woods.
" Thomas felt a million thoughts go through his head in that moment.
They were only thirty feet away now.
Alby, you can’t—" He stopped when Alby’s fiery eyes shot such a look of anger at him he felt his heart stutter.
"No way," he murmured, almost in a trance.
The meeting was dismissed and everyone except Newt and Minho left the room in a hurry.
He turned to look at Newt and nodded.
His memory loss was baffling in its complexity.
"Newt stepped forward and dug his hands into the thick ivy, spreading several vines away from the wall to reveal a dust-frosted window, a square about two feet wide.
"But looks like I’ve got some—man, we could go canoeing in these things.
Which makes me think we already knew each other.
He’d just defeated a Griever, one of the monsters that had terrorized the Gladers for more than two years.
The sense of relief that flooded through Thomas surprised him—he wasn’t completely alone in this place.
Wondered when the fight would begin.
He had to fight the bile that surged up his throat.
Thomas looked back at his captors, feeling awkward but desperate to ask questions.
Actually, a lot of Gladers have more than one job.
For some reason the girl had popped into his head again, out of the blue, and then thoughts of Ben, and the dead Griever, which should have been a good thing but everyone acted as if it were anything but.
"Man," Alby said, then ran his hands over his short hair as he let out a long sigh.
" He looked at Newt, hoping to see some sort of recognition in his eyes.
But if you wanna haul it right now, we could probably make it there and back before the walls shut.
"One of the boys standing in front of them looked back over his shoulder, annoyance crossing his face.
They didn’t close tonight.
They’d been here two years?
A sun couldn’t just disappear.
Murmurs made their way down the line, and finally Teresa turned to Thomas.
"You know about the ones from the Glade, but there are four more out in the Maze that lead to Sections One, Three, Five, and Seven.
Plus"—the boy rolled his eyes—"they spend most of their time running, not writing.
When Minho returned, safe and sound, Thomas thought he seemed very optimistic that it really was an exit.
" He reached down and rubbed his right ankle absently, a brief look of pain flashing across his face.
The look made Thomas think it was more from the memory, not iDocanyatual.
"I’m done with you.
Thomas reached in and pulled apart the curtains of ivy, then stared blankly at a square of metal riveted to the stone with words stamped across it in big capital letters.
You’re a kid—you can’t help what they forced you to do.
A loud clank rang out above him and he sucked in a startled breath as he looked up.
"Thomas waited, hoping that Newt or Alby would have a positive reaction to the news, maybe even have further information to shed light on the mystery.
Everyone crowded together against the wall farthest from the windows, doing their best to keep quiet.
Thomas was surprised at its simplicity.
"Thomas nodded and headed out the door, Newt leading the way.
It made him sick to think that way about a dead girl, but he couldn’t look away.
Suddenly, the Glade, the walls, the Maze—it all seemed … familiar.
Thomas lost sight of the body as he struggled with Newt, thankful for the distraction.
The next time they rounded a corner, Thomas faltered, his heart skipping a beat when he saw movement up ahead.
" He paused, as if expecting a laugh, but none came.
They finally made it to a rectangular cut in a long wall to the north that looked like a doorway without a door.
He watched, curious, as they met at the big iron door of the small building; one of the boys turned the rusty wheel handle, grunting with the effort.
"As you all know, the last few days have been bloody crazy, and quite a bit seems centered around our Greenbean, Tommy, seated before us.
"Thomas could tell the boy was being less than honest but decided not to press him.
Thomas had noticed them exchange an odd look before they split up, almost as if communicating some secret with their eyes.
He closed his eyes and forced the thoughts and dark images away and at some point he fell asleep.
"I wasn’t here, but I heard the kid who volunteered to do it had only gone down about ten feet when something swooshed through the air and cut him clean in half.
From the looks of it, Minho felt the same way.
None of us knew jack on First Day, you neither.
It made his stomach turn.
That night, Thomas lay staring at the sparkling sky, wondering if he’d ever sleep again.
After a minute or so of walking, he heard a shriek from ahead, followed by another, then another.
Especially after last night.
"Shouldn’t someone give a pep talk or something?" Minho asked, pulling Thomas’s attention away from Alby.
"Look forward to it, shuck-face!"As if the taunting gave Thomas a sudden burst of courage, he walked over to the lit door, ignoring the creaking floorboards and laughter downstairs—ignoring the onslaught of words he didn’t understand, suppressing the dreadful feelings they induced.
They started at the Box, which was closed at the moment—double doors of metal lying flat on the ground, covered in white paint, faded and cracked.
We can’t live that way anymore, day to day, thinking that what matters most is getting back to the Glade before the Doors close, snug and safe.
"Thomas was surprised at the sudden change of heart.
The irony of the question struck him—he didn’t even know who he was.
The elation of his escape had faded rapidly, leaving him with pain and thoughts of his new life in the Glade.
Be thankful for these walls.
"Thomas almost fell down at this.
"You broke our bloody Number One Rule, so you get one day in the Slammer.
Testing our ability to hope and fight.
His great, racking sobs echoed through the chamber like the sounds of tortured pain.
They had three possible choices, but Minho went to the right without hesitating.
He and Minho made their way silently back to the Glade.
Minho’s head popped up; he looked down one of the darkened stone corridors.
As if things couldn’t have gotten any stranger.
Every one of you loved seeing that slinthead get his dues, and you know it.
Why do you think the Grievers are only taking one shank at a time?"Thomas’s stomach turned sour—he knew the exact answer to that question, and some others now.
"You’re already using Alby’s dirty words.
"Thomas felt like he’d been caught stealing, but he was genuinely concerned—Newt was one of the few people in the Glade he actually liked.
"For the first time, Thomas thought Chuck’s personality had gone from mildly irritating to intolerable.
They’ve made an opening!
"Thomas was surprised to hear it was so bad—he wished Alby would give details, describe something, anything.
Thomas felt tears swell under his eyelids; one escaped and trickled down his right temple, intohis hair.
His thoughts were churning too much about the gray sky and what Teresa—at least, he thought it had been the girl—had told him in his mind to participate in any conversation.
If it weren’t for the little fact they were torn apart from friends and families and trapped in a Maze with a bunch of monsters, it could be paradiDocse.
.
co Some things here were too perfect.
Thomas clamped his hands to his ears, looking around as the siren blared, his heart about to thump its way out of his chest.
Down and down it went, not leaving his sight until it grew too small to see.
The sky overhead was cloudless and blue, but Thomas could see no sign of the sun despite the brightness of the day.
She didn’t answer at first, but then her voice popped into his thoughts as clearly as if she were sitting next to him.
The Slammer stood in an obscure place between the Homestead and the north Glade wall, hidden behind thorny, ragged bushes that looked like they hadn’t been trimmed in ages.
""No, no, no, no, no," Ben was saying, half under his breath.
The look was fast—only a few seconds—but it was enough to haunt him forever.
And then he looked up, through the leafy canopy of branches.
Thomas, when he should’ve been wettin’ his pants, took control, defied all laws of physics and gravity to get Alby up onto that wall, diverted the Grievers away from him, beat one off, found—""We get the point," Gally snapped.
co until he’d be done with the Gardens.
All this added up to making us think there had to be a solution, just encouraging us to work all the harder while at the same time magnifying our discouragement at not finding one.
Thomas had no memory of his life before the Box, but he was positive he’d finished the worst twenty-four hours of his existence.
"We always have at least eight Runners, including the Keeper.
Thomas, startled, swung around to look, his mind so concentrated on the vines that he’d momentarily shut out the Grievers; he searched all three directions of the Maze.
" Thomas leaned over the shoulder of a skinny boy standing in front of him to get a look at the body on the ground.
Thomas could almost hear his own heart beating.
Before his pendulum swing took him back toward Alby, he reached out for another vine, catching a nice thick one.
"You lead the way now," Thomas heard him say.
"Thomas looked at each of the three sets of Grievers—not one had yet made a move toward the Gladers—and nodded.
He knew he should hold some suspicion, having no reason to trust anyone yet, but the curiosity won out.
He held Gally down with his left hand, pushing down on the boy’s neck, as his right fist rained punches upon Gally’s face, one after another.
"Looks like a maze," Thomas whispered, almost laughing to himself.
" But the tremor in his voice gave him away—he was just trying to say the right thing.
"Anyway, I’m going no matter what, so you better not waste it.
He met Alby’s glare evenly and answered the only way he knew how.
The sun obviously had not disappeared—that wasn’t possible.
Never been an exit.
The only reason the Grievers are doing it one by one is so we don’t all die before it ends the way it’s supposed to.
He wanted to cry, but no tears came; he could only sit there, alone, waiting.
He then laid them one on top of the other so that each drawing of the Maze matched the same day above it and below it, until he was looking at eight different sections of the Maze at once.
And why are Grievers called Grievers?"Minho explained as they continued through the endless turns of the Maze, neither one of them leading now.
"They forced us to help.
Taking heart at the slight falter, Thomas started screaming as he charged.
" Thomas’s stomach rumbled, interrupting his thoughts.
You get me?"Thomas looked over at Newt, hoping for help.
When he could hear only the sounds of distant Glader conversations, as well as faint echoes of bleating sheep and snorting pigs, his wish was granted; he found the junction of the two giant walls and collapsed into the corner to rest.
He made no sound.
" Thomas followed Chuck’s gaze and looked up.
Nothing developed, but something about that creepy old building gave him goose bumps, a disquieting chill.
High and shrill, the barely human shriek echoed across the stone courtyard; every kid in sight turned to look toward the source.
That even in escape, dreary days lay ahead.
And it was an odd sight on the other side: Ben, trembling, crying, a roughly cut collar of old leather wrapped around his pale, scrawny neck, attached to a long pole that stretched from him to Alby, twenty feet away.
Thomas hesitated, then stepped into it with his right foot and clutched the rope as he was yanked toward the sky.
Winston showed Thomas around for the first hour, pointing out which pens held which animals, where the chicken and turkey coops were, what went where in the barn.
Thomas held his hands up again, wishing he could just zap his thoughts into everyone else’s brains.
One way or another.
Spend one day with them suckers— that’ll cure any thoughts of goin’ that direction, I can tell ya that.
"Well, the walls move every day, right?""Yeah.
" Thomas half meant it.
A Griever’s pulsating, bulbous body had squirmed halfway through the destroyed window, metallic arms with pincers snapping and clawing in all directions.
Wooden poles were carved into spears or wrapped in barbwire; the knives were sharpened and fastened with twine to the ends of sturdy branches hacked from trees in the woods; chunks of broken glass were duct-taped to shovels.
The older boy turned to give Thomas such an annoyed look he thought twice about saying anything.
Its arms shifted about like the legs of the beetle blade, some with sharp picks that drove into the stone of the wall for support.
"Thomas scowled, wishing he could find one little spark of hope.
Then a sharp cry from Alby up ahead snapped Thomas to attention; Minho was moaning.
You really think there’s an exit anywhere?
Drop your sissy side and start using that shuck brain if you got one.
"Who am I nicknamed after?"Thomas couldn’t help shaking his head—here they were, about to embark on probably the most dangerous task of their lives, and Chuck was curious where he’d gotten his nickname.
He was sure he’d never seen her before—but then the slightest hint of doubt crept into his mind.
Eventually, the day dragged to a close, and the setting of the sun brought the now-familiar grinding of the four Doors closing for the night.
Thomas reached out and grabbed a vine two feet to the left of where he hung.
He ran down a long hallway, into a dimly lit tunnel.
The kid had droopy eyes and a long face —for some reason he looked as bored as humanly possible.
Thomas watched one of them look down to write something, another reach up and put on a pair of glasses.
She was near him, curled up in two blankets.
Pounding the stone with his feet, he fled as fast as he possibly could.
Alby stopped walking, and Thomas was surprised to see they’d reached the South Door; the two walls bracketing the exit towered above them.
Before he could move, Teresa was already down there, crouching on her knees.
He looked to see that she was as worried as Newt, which made him feel good.
The sudden movement almost made Thomas stop, his brief moment of insane courage washing away, but he kept running.
It almost seemed to him as if the Keepers wantediDocpeople.
"Thomas nodded, absently kicking a loose rock across the dusty, cracked stone floor of the Glade.
"A minute passed, then two.
"Any lingering haze of sleep had already vanished from Thomas’s mind.
So shocked he almost quit running.
He knew he had a lot to learn—that was why he was asking questions.
The reality of the dreadful decision he’d made earlier squeezed his heart like a crushing fist.
Throwing his arms out, Thomas flailed, reaching and grabbing to stop his plunge to the hard stone below.
His legs kicked out and he rolled onto his side, thrashing back and forth as if someone else were trying to strangle him.
" It barely made sense even to Thomas, but he felt it deeply.
First the delusions start, then animal instincts begin to overpower the human ones.
Alby looked up, his eyes wet with tears.
He pushed himself back up onto his knees so he was looking down at the older boy.
Killzone.
Beds were assigned, clothes and bathroom things were passed out, dinner was served.
Let’s go look for some leftovers from lunch.
And the faint light emanating from their pursuers made the oddity up ahead all the more apparent.
Chuck had scooted away from the Grievers, bumping into Teresa—she held him tightly, squeezing him in a fierce hug.
The two ivy-covered walls on either side of him seemed to intersect with nothing but sky up ahead.
In some ways, he wanted to tell Minho about how he and Teresa could talk, to share what was happening before it made his brain explode.
We’ll pack our stuff shuck-full so we can stay out there a few days.
"Somehow I have to get through that!" He nodded toward the rolling pack of Grievers between them and the Cliff—they looked like one big mass of rumbling, spiked blubber, glistening with flashes of lights off steel.
As soon as he made contact with the Griever’s body, disgustingly sinking inches into its gushy skin, he kicked out with both feet to push off, squirming to avoid the swarm of needles and claws coming at him from all directions.
" Thomas said it in a matter-of- fact tone, as a resigned repeat of what Minho had said a moment earlier.
You really need to study several weeks, look for patterns, anything.
You know a way out?" "Yeah.
He let go of Chuck, slumped backward, trying not to look at the boy’s shirt, black with blood.
" Minho sighed as if bored, then muttered, almost to himself, "Why do you shanks always come in here asking stupid questions?
"Thomas nodded, his whole body itching with the desire to ask questions.
It looked fresh and bore the name Stephen—the n extra small and right at the edge because the carver hadn’t estimated well how much room he’d need.
Two years, nothing different, now this.
"I just … feel like I need to save everyone.
Doesn’t really look familiar at all.
A few seconds later, it stopped moving altogether.
The woman almost seemed in a trance as she spoke, never taking her eyes off an indistinct spot in the distance.
On the left side of the East Door, deep holes several inches in diameter and spaced a foot apart were bored into the rock, beginning near the ground and continuing all the way up.
"You’ll have to make it through the night in there.
"If I can convince those shanks—and that’s a big if—the best time to go would be at nightiDoc.
His stomach turned and he quickly looked away.
"What do you mean, days?""I mean, days.
"Put her next to Ben’s room, and keep a watch on her day and night.
"Everyone put some thought into it—maybe when we get right nice and bored we can have another Gathering to talk about it.
Alby pointed down at the doors.
The creatures on both sides of their group seemed to have noticed them again.
"Shuck it, boy, what you lookin’ at?"Thomas shook his head slightly, feeling like he’d been in a trance.
It held true, just like all the others.
Soon after eating, no one argued when they were told it was time for bed.
Alby’s screams, now distant but still audible, only made it worse.
"It’s when the Keepers meet—they only call one when something weird or terrible happens.
As he scrambled to his feet, he felt the room sway less and less until it finally stilled.
The voices were odd, tinged with echo; some of the words were completely foreign—others felt familiar.
Maybe we can get past them—why else would they just be sitting—"A loud noise from behind cut him off—he spun to see more Grievers moving down the corridor toward them, spikes flaring, metal arms groping, coming from the direction of the Glade.
I pretty much hated you the last couple days.
And his limp body, to which Thomas still clung, seemed a cold talisman —that not only would those dreams of a hopeful future never come to pass, but that life had never been that way in the first place.
Thomas focused back in on the dozens of strangers around him.
Thomas crashed to the ground; he felt a grave marker dig into his back before it snapped in two, burning a deep scratch along his flesh.
When they were finished, Thomas headed back to the secluded place where he’d slept the night before, in the corner behind the Deadheads.
"I’m probably twelve years old, dude.
"Newt looked down in the Box one more time, then faced the crowd, gravely.
"Greenie, we’ve never had two Newbies show up in the same month, much less two days in a row.
Thomas was happy with the conversation—it had gone about as well as he could’ve possibly hoped.
He didn’t want to make Newt any more upset than he already was, but he needed answers.
The tone of his voice only heightened Thomas’s concern.
" Thomas paused, surprised at himself.
""I’m not stupid!" Teresa shouted, her voice muffled by the walls.
But Thomas refused to look back, knowing every second counted.
No one said a word, as if all speculation on the new sky had been exhausted.
They put us in the Box and sent us up here—a big group to start and then one a month over the last two years.
One a night.
There was only one answer to hold on to.
"That was one of them beetle blades," someone said.
Chuck screamed as he flew through the air, and he almost missed the target, but his feet went through; then his stomach and arms slammed against the sides of the invisible hole before he disappeared inside.
Though Thomas was surprised, any alarm melted away immediately.
"Wasn’t so hard," Thomas muttered, then turned to see Teresa frantically typing away at the keyboard.
"Someone cheered, and then someone else.
The stairs reached a landing, turned left, then came upon a railed hallway leading to several rooms.
co a large group of Gladers got up and ran toward the West Door, talking excitedly about something.
But you’ve seen what happens at night.
"The tension was palpable; Thomas felt like the air in the room had become glass that could shatter at any second.
Feeling his will fade into blackness, Thomas braced his feet and held up his fists halfheartedly.
Thomas had gotten so used to looks of despair, it was almost unsettling to see happy faces.
They were now only dozens of yards away, single file, charging in with a vengeance, moving surprisingly fast.
Yet they didn’t sound like they were coming from the room, from outside his body.
"What do you think happened?" Chuck said, a pitiful tremor in his voice, his eyes glued to the sky.
They had to hope the creatures would keep to their normal schedule and not come out during daytime hours.
" At that Alby turned and walked away, not saying another word.
And with no more lights, Thomas couldn’t see a single thing.
Could the Maze really be so massively huge that even after two years they still hadn’t found a way out?
"And why do you live inside a freaking maze?" He felt a rattling pressure of uncertainty, making his head splinter with pain.
"What is that, anyway?
A red light to his left, on the wall, caught his attention.
We couldn’t accept that a problem can’t be solved—especially when it’s something as simple as a maze.
" Alby sighed, clearly done with the conversation.
As if in answer to her question, someone fell through the black square—it was Minho, looking as if he’d been scratched or stabbed on ninety percent of his body.
When he’d moved back ten feet, he could no longer see the end of the vine way above; it disappeared in the darkness.
29coThomas didn’t stop until the voice had gone for good.
" Thomas was relieved someone was finally getting it.
Everyone needs a buddy in this place.
" He nudged Thomas, who looked up.
"Why don’t you just tell us what the klunk we’re doing this for?""I’m done explaining," Thomas said, knowing they just had to see what he was picturing in his mind.
But as he got closer, he realized they were surrounding something on the ground, all of them looking down at it.
"Thomas couldn’t help smiling at the Keeper’s clever ways.
"Are you gonna pitch in?"Alby looked up, surprise crossing his face as if he hadn’t known that anyone else was in the room.
Thomas ran right behind Minho for two more hours, sprinkled with little breaks that seemed to get shorter every time.
" Thomas knew he was right about the Hole, the code, the door, the need to fight.
He fought the fear, forced his body to remain perfectly still, hanging there in the vines.
Either way, if he’d had any doubt about what he’d told Chuck the night before, it had now completely vanished.
"Thomas hated that his link to Ben was being made public—hated the responsibility he felt.
"Just a few days after this guy shows up, he steps out in the Maze to save two shanks he hardly knows.
The terrible sounds he’d heard escalate for the last hour took on a high-pitched, mechanical squeal, like a robotic death yell.
But down the road a piece, you’ll be fightin’ true and good.
" He had to get away from this guy.
Teresa stood to his right, leaning against the massive stone wall.
Thomas was just about to say something when he heard sounds from the other end of the long alley—he looked to see yet more Grievers.
" Newt made for the door, but Chuck held up his hand.
He knew he must look out of it —he felt like he’d been drugged.
Minho looked up, saw Thomas, who knew his eyes must be bulging out of his head.
Be honest if anything—anything at all—seems familiar.
Thomas couldn’t believe the question.
"Reason we’re here is because almost every lovin’ kid in the Glade has come up to me in the last day or two either boohooing about Thomas or beggin’ to take his bloody hand in marriage.
The lights of the chamber flashed off the silvery surface—a wicked-looking dagger, gripped tightly in his fingers.
"Alby looked out at the Maze, then back at Minho.
"Thomas sighed; it was such a long story, and he didn’t feel like telling the whole thing.
""Dude, it smells like feet down there!""Hope you enjoyed the one-way trip, Greenie.
He felt an uncomfortable sense of vertigo looking at the towering walls, as if he hovered above them instead of sitting at their base.
"We should do it tonight, before anyone else is killed.
When I went through the Changing, I saw flashes of images—hundreds of them—like a slide show in fast forward.
He grew uneasy and realized he’d slowed his pace, not so eager to reach the walls anymore.
Thomas had almost expected the skeletal remnant of a person—someone on the verge of death.
Thomas was just passing the Box when he was surprised to see someone enter the Glade from the Maze, through the West Door, to his left—an Asian kid with strong arms and short black hair, who looked a little older than Thomas.
It’d been easy to talk about—the nothing -to-lose fight, the hope that just one of them would be taken, the chance to finally escape.
"We can’t go back!" he finally yelled, turning to look at everyone in the room.
Thomas blinked, momentarily surprised by the voice since she hadn’t done it in a while.
"All right, everybody trace the last ten or so days onto a piece of this stuff.
Newt’s eyes narrowed as he looked out toward one of the entrances to the Maze.
I’m the real leader here, not the two geezer shanks upstairs.
He showed a thumbs-up sign in the window, then walked away.
When the Griever rolled, it made the metallic whirring sound, like the spinning blade of a saw.
I guess those shuck-faces don’t want us seeing how wonderful life is when you don’t live in a freaking maze.
A few days later, he’s running around the Maze with Grievers, acting like he owns the place.
Thomas turned to look back into the Maze and dread washed through him.
"The three words ran through Thomas’s mind over and over.
co by a blur of movement at his feet, followed by a hurried set of clacking sounds.
But their leader didn’t look in the least bit reprimanded or remorseful.
Number one priority is to protect Thomas and Teresa.
"Shuck things can climb the bloody walls, remember?
It made sense.
"Minho looked over at him, contemplative.
It felt as if the whole earth shook; he looked around, panicked.
Longest one they could possibly make.
"Whoa!" Chuck yelled, the slightest hint of his old self breaking through.
He was conscious, but Thomas had never seen someone so exhausted.
" There were a few scattered laughs, and then everyone gathered behind Alby and Newt, packing in even tighter, waiting to hear what they said.
Running the Maze seemed like such a waste of time compared to figuring out the code.
"I don’t even know where I was three days ago, much less why this Minho guy would find a dead thing called a Griever.
And if God himself came down right now and told me I could go back home …" Alby looked to the ground and shook his head again.
The Glade had gone back to business as usual—people working the jobs, the doors of the Box closed, sun shining down.
So when Thomas saw me give up, he shouldn’t have questioned it.
Water’s pumped in through pipes in the ground—always has been, or we’d have starved to death a long time ago.
Honestly, I’m amazed that in the end, despite everything, we were able to collect such a large population of kids that just never gave up.
"No good answers for ya, not yet, anyway.
No way, he thought.
"What’re you doing up here, Greenie!" Alby yelled, his lips taut with anger, eyes on fireiDoc.
.
coThomas felt weak.
44	Thomas and Minho didn’t stop until they were halfway to the last dead end of Section Eight.
Does everyone go psycho like Ben and start trying to kill people?""Ben was way worse than most.
What matters most is getting Thomas and Teresa to the Griever Hole!"Thomas looked away from him, back at the approaching monsters—they were only a few feet away.
The boy screamed, fell to the floor, his body already convulsing.
Despite the number of people and the chaos of such a change, a disturbing silence hung over the activities, as if no one wanted to draw attention to themselves.
Winston was the only one to say no.
Newt frowned, looked at the ground.
Without having to look behind him, he knew the Grievers were gaining ground at an alarming rate.
Once they left the lawn area and stepped onto the hard gray stone of the courtyard floor, Newt broke into a run, heading for the western wall.
But no one quit.
Either way, only he had heard the voice inside his head.
They tested thousands, chose you for the big one.
He had no idea why that suddenly made him so nervous.
One of the Grievers sounded like it was moving toward the house.
Thomas threw another one, another foot out.
He looked up, his eyes wet with tears.
"Thomas quickly gathered his thoughts, grasping for the right words inside the swirling cloud of frustration, confusion and anger in his mind.
Plus, he might not want you to hear it anyway.
He didn’t love it, and mostly ignored the other boys working alongside him, but he didn’t hate it nearly as much as what he’d done for Winston at the Blood House.
Gally folded his arms and leaned back in his chair, the scowl on his face so forced that Thomas almost laughed out loud.
"No one ever understood!" the boy screamed over the horrible noise of the creature, crunching its way deeper into the Homestead, ripping the wall to pieces.
Then, just as they stepped through the doorway, Alby mumbled something from his bed.
"Wee little fat shank, but nice sap when all’s said and done.
Did it move at all—was its skin still moist?"Thomas was bursting with questions—Metal spikes?
He tested each one, and they all proved to be as strong as the first.
Massive stone walls, hundreds of feet high, moving like sliding glass doors—an image from his past life that flashed through his thoughts.
Thomas tightened the straps on his backpack, held his makeshift fighting spear tightly in his right fist.
So you’ll believe me when I tell you the only way we can get out of here.
Several Gladers he didn’t know were gathered around the table, standing; they all looked exhausted, their eyes sunken.
He was already completely confused—being blamed for things only made him feel worse.
I was gonna tell you—someone said they saw him run out into the Maze after heiDocleft.
" This gave Thomas pause.
" And with that Minho turned and started running.
Then he walked away, hunched over, quiet.
He caught a gleam of red light sweeping the ground in front of the creature as if it came from its eyes.
" Alby looked just as confused as Thomas felt.
It takes us a whole day to map out our area—hoping against hope there’s an exit—then we come back and draw it up, a separate page for each day.
Not until something about these patterns gives a clue that an exit might open up, even temporarily.
Several boys milled about the Glade that night, but for the most part it was quiet, like everyone just wanted to go to sleep, end the day and be done with it.
You can count on Chuck, okay?"Thomas had almost reached the front door of the shack and the small group of boys congregating there when he was hit by a sudden and surprise rush of anger.
A large round handle resembling a steel steering wheel marked the only way to open the door, just like something within a submarine.
The Runners had just returned and entered the mysterious Map Room, clanging the iron door shut; Minho had already gone in earlier.
Sun flares are normal, but these were unprecedented, massive, spiking higher and higher—and once they were noticed, it was only minutes before their heat slammed into Earth.
"The woman broke her gaze into nothingness and focused on Thomas, then looked at Teresa, then Thomas again.
Not only was there the chance of getting lost, he could actually find himself running toward the Grievers instead of away from them.
Thomas stared in that direction, through the gap in the walls that served as an exit from the Glade.
" Thomas returned to the crude map, trying to visualize the Maze and see stone walls where Minho had penciled lines.
He spoke over his shoulder as he shuffled away—it looked like his whole body was in pain.
A loop of rough leather, fastened to the metal with a massive staple.
"Well, they’re doors.
"They’d just stepped outside the Map Room, the heavy door clanging shut behind them, when Newt and Alby walked up, neither one of them looking very happy.
That’s called hypocrisy, you shuck-faced piece of—""Enough," Newt said.
But impossibly, they were gone—not even a sign of them in the emptiness that stretched below.
He looked so much better than the day before, Thomas couldn’t help staring at him.
Tonight the Grievers better be scared.
He deserved to go home at night to a family who loved him, worried about him.
If we’re gonna die, let’s freakin’ do it fighting.
""Serious?"Thomas let out a sigh.
"Crap—it’s gone!
He let out a low, gurgly burp that made Thomas cringe.
Thomas followed Newt as he hurried down the stairs and out of the Homestead into the bright light of midafternoon.
"So what’s the latest on that girl from yesterday?" If anything had penetrated the haze of his long morning, it had been thoughts of her.
He leaned toward the glass of the window as she disappeared from his view up ahead.
He almost wished the suckers would just come and get it over with.
"It’s just sitting up there—almost like that dead one we saw.
Half of us made it.
A bolt of pain shot down his spine as a woman’s head appeared two inches above him, upside down, blocking out Teresa.
His emotions were scattered: appreciation for Minho standing up to everybody on his behalf, disbelief at Gally’s continuous belligerence, fear of what the final decision would be.
"I’m the bloody Chair right now, and if I hear one more buggin’ word out of turn from you, I’ll be arrangin’ another Banishing for your sorry butt.
His eyes slid back into normal position, focused on Thomas, clinging to life.
Then, from somewhere down the dark tunnel, came the sound of a door sliding open.
Get ready.
What he saw amazed him.
He and Minho made it back to the Glade, went to the Map Room, wrote up the day’s Maze route, compared it to the previous day’s.
"Winston was an acne-covered kid, short but muscular, and it seemed to Thomas the Keeper liked his job way too much.
Thomas noticed small red lights flashing here and there along the wall’s face, moving about, stopping, turning off and on.
Much preferring one over three, he ran straight toward the Griever that had chased him there.
Thomas expected more outbursts, but was surprised when everyone nodded their consent, even Gally.
Something he’d seen before, but through the safety of thick glass.
He swung his body out and to the left; then he jumped toward the wall of the Maze, trying to grab another vine; the Griever’s vicious tools snapped and clawed at him from behind.
He began to back away from the window, but something outside caught his eye.
""Sorry, I honestly don’t.
"Stick that sucker in someone who’s been stung and it saves ’em.
"Thomas couldn’t have agreed more and once again almost broke his order to stay quiet, but stopped himself.
The gray darkness seemed to press on the window from outside, with promises of bad things to come.
Before Thomas or anyone else could react, he’d already ripped one board free; he threw it to the ground.
Thomas hugged Chuck to his chest, squeezed him as tightly as possible, as if that could somehow bring him back, or show thanks for saving his life, for being his friend when no one else would.
Just be glad the Grievers only come out at night.
Chuck looked closely at Thomas and slowly broke into an uneasy grin.
Black spots swam before Thomas’s eyes; the room tilted and swayed.
"It started with the sun flares," the woman said, her gaze growing distant.
" And so they’d gone back.
He finally forced himself to look over at the haggard building.
Newt had already made it back to the Homestead, but at Thomas’s cry he immediately spun around and broke into a stuttering run toward the Door.
You should not have done that.
A line of small-leafed weeds ran along the edge of one of the stone blocks, tiny yellow flowers peeping through as if searching for the sun, long disappeared behind the enormous walls of the Glade.
And we’ve kept fighting no matter how hopeless it’s gotten.
This seemed a good time to bring up one of the million questions bouncing through his brain.
"Man, you are one butt-load of sunshine, let me tell you.
They found Newt at the West Door, pacing, running his hands through his hair.
With a metallic scrape the doors were opened, and a puff of dust from the surrounding stone rose into the air.
He held one of the papers up to the light, saw how it shone through with a milky glow.
Finally, half under his breath, he murmured, "Same reason we all feel crappy.
Aren’t Minho and I the only ones who’ve survived a night out there?""That’s what I’m saying.
"Minho looked at Thomas.
"Trust me, when nighttime strikes, you want to be in bed.
Thomas slouched against the railing in the hallway and stared at the floor, not sure what to do next.
He didn’t know what the ultimate picture would be, but his next words almost felt like they were coming from someone else.
"What did you do?"Thomas, confused by the question, glanced at Teresa to see if she knew what he meant.
By the time midafternoon arrived, Thomas was ready to collapse from exhaustion—all that bending over and crawling around on your knees in the dirt was the pits.
Frustrated, worried, tired of his thoughts, he called out to Teresa.
And Gally, and others who’ve been stung and survived?"Minho glanced up at him with a look that said he was dumber than cow klunk.
""Thomas!" Minho was running up to them.
And so it went for him as they kept moving, those Gladers not used to running such distances gasping in huge gulps of air.
"Dude, I’m exhausted, starving, and sun-sick.
Although we expected a few more of you to give up along the way.
But as he fell asleep, two things wouldn’t leave his mind.
"Um, I’ve never been outside the Glade.
Thomas took a step backward, noticing others doing the same.
""I’ve only cried once since showing up, but that was after almost getting eaten alive.
Thomas felt a burst of warmth in his chest, reached up and actually touched it, surprised at himself.
""Then why is it so terrible out there?" What else didn’t he know about?Newt sighed.
The lightless elevator swayed back and forth as it ascended, turning the boy’s stomach sour with nausea; a smell like burnt oil invaded his senses, making him feel worse.
Taken care of these people?"Hey, look, it’s the Greenbean," one of the older boys called out.
Now the images are gettin’ up and gone, like that same somethin’ don’t like me remembering.
Just sit on your butt and be quiet—maybe it’ll go away.
Thomas assumed Gally would retaliate, but he straightened instead, taking everyone in with his mad gaze.
Flickering fluorescent lights shone from the ceiling.
" He’d accepted it now, almost wanted it.
"Well, then who killed the stupid thing?"Excellent question, Thomas thought.
"Thomas, still a bit queasy from the Changing, forced himself to take a second and gain his composure.
The lights cast eerie shadows across the Maze.
""It ain’t pretty," Alby answered, and for the first time since Newt had left, Alby looked up, straight at Thomas.
""Everyone knows what they’re getting into.
Newt was right—they’d better wait until night and hope that most of the Grievers were in the Maze, not inside their Hole.
Anyone but Chuck.
Thomas shrieked before he could stop himself, jerked away from the window—but the thing bounced backward, leaving the glass undamaged.
Then he said, Teresa?Yeah?Thomas was scared to share his thoughts, but did.
Depending on how you looked at it.
"You’re sure?" He looked like he didn’t believe a word Thomas said, seemed almost angry.
"He stepped out of the kitchen and into the courtyard before Chuck could offer to join him.
It was straight, the walls, solid, with no hallways branching off.
"At least he can understand half my words.
Then Thomas stared in shock as up ahead the Griever dug in with its spikes and spun forward right up to the Cliff’s edge, then off, into the gray abyss.
Thomas looked over at Newt.
He’d had no idea it was possible to feel so exhausted, despite the few hours of sleep he’d gotten.
Can’t get out of the Maze, and this idea of hanging with the Grievers at their bachelor pad sounds as stupid as anything I’ve ever heard in my life.
" But he didn’t want to leave; he almost wished he could get thrown in the Slammer with her.
The metal of key and lock jingled; then the door to the cell swung wide open.
"Everyone looked at Thomas; he simply nodded.
Winston had said for him to go on alone, that he’d hang around the Blood House, which was fine with Thomas.
Anyway, then this.
Behind each one, a person—some men, some women, all of them pale and thin—sat observing the Gladers, staring through the glass with squinted eyes.
The Keeper didn’t seem surprised, but argued all the same.
"But Newt thinks we should go tonight.
The room was larger than Thomas had expected, at least thirty square feet.
The sounds of pursuit from behind didn’t relent or fade, but he wasn’t losing ground, either.
Thomas couldn’t imagine going out that way, but based on Ben’s last moments, psychotically thrashing and spitting and screaming, he no longer doubted the importance of the Glade rule that no one should enter the Maze except Runners, and then only during the day.
"But … how could you possibly blame her for the walls not closing?"Newt stepped up, lightly placed a hand on Alby’s chest and pushed him back.
He had to watch as Winston slaughtered a hog and began preparing its many parts for future eating.
Breakfast was a blur, and an hour after it was over, Thomas couldn’t remember what he’d eaten.
"On the count of three," Jeff, the taller Med-jack, was saying, his tall frame looking iDocrdiculous.
"Thomas sucked in a deep breath, trying not to think about only being halfway done for the day.
It didn’t move, made no sound—even the haunting groans had stopped completely.
Something about that Griever being dead and then not dead, something about where it had gone once it sprang to life …Frustrated, he put it aside and sprinted to catch up.
"I hope the Changing doesn’t give us real memories—just plants fake ones.
Plus, he was absolutely terrified and he didn’t want the others to notice.
The not-so-veiled accusations thrown at him only a few minutes before proved that the others suspected something, too, but what?
He quickly leaned out of the building to get a better look.
He sat quietly for a few moments, looking out at all the hustle -bustle starting to whip up across the Glade.
I can’t believe you only have to be the Greenbean for one day.
Freak, that’s the Number One Rule, the only one you’ll never be forgiven for breaking.
But none of it makes sense yet.
"And if you get lonely, you can talk to me with your…	trick all you want.
The pale, miserable boy still made no effort to resist, letting them drag him across the dusty stone of the courtyard.
Show ya why them buggin’ walls close shut every night.
Where would he take him, anyway?He pushed and pulled Alby back over to the crack that marked the entrance to the Glade, and propped him once more into a sitting position, leaning against the stone wall.
There’s a reason Gally accused me of so much stuff, and why everyone who’s gone through the Changing recognizes me.
Gradually, though, order was restored and everyone sat down.
The other one had gone after Chuck and was just about to swipe at the kid with a long blade.
"Haven’t you gotten desperate enough to stay out there overnight, see if maybe something opens while the walls are moving?"Minho looked up at him, a flash of anger in his eyes.
And now he was one of them.
Minho looked down at his hands clasped to Thomas’s shirt and shame washed across his face.
After so long in darkness, the light stabbed his eyes; he looked away, covering his face with both hands.
It’d seemed such a victory just to save his life, bring him back from a night in the Maze.
But most importantly, Teresa and I have a … gift that made us very valuable as they designed and built this place.
He crouched so that his head was positioned just below where the person on the inside would be able to see him.
whirrrrrrrrrrrrrrr click-click-click  whirrrrrrrrrrrrrrrclick-click-clickThomas peeked down without moving his head—the Griever had finally reached the wall where he and Alby hung.
Startled, he reacted quickly, looking just in time to see a flash of silver.
Hating how everyone gawked at him, heconcentrated on studying the place the boy had called the Glade.
Plus, his thoughts kept going back to her.
32coMinho woke Thomas before dawn, motioning with a flashlight to follow him back to the Homestead.
We’re gonna fight our way through to the Griever Hole, and Tommy here’s gonna punch in his little magic code and then we’re gonna get payback on the Creators.
Teresa slipped down the slide with an almost cheerful shriek, and Thomas followed her before he could talk himself out of it—anything was better than the Maze.
" Chuck didn’t say anything, but Thomas thought he heard the slightest of sniffles.
Guilt racked him because he knew for a certainty he would trade any one of the Gladers in that room for Chuck.
"Three days," Chuck answered.
"The woman looked back and forth between Thomas and Teresa, then let out a sigh.
He scratched out a few lines on the paper, then looked up at Minho.
" Thomas headed to the right, craning his neck to look high up at the wall, searching along the thick vines until he found the spot where Alby hung by his arms and legs far above them.
He looked as alien as anything Thomas could imagine.
You even said you didn’t really know what you were looking for, but you kept studying them anyway.
The third one planted a heavily spiked arm into the stone, but its momentum was too much.
Might as well fight the Grievers rather than sit around letting them pick us off one by one.
Eventually, his "buddy" did doze off, and based on the rumble of snores across the Glade, so did everyone else.
"That we’re freakin’ orphans raised by scientists?""Yes," Thomas said, hoping his expression didn’t give away just how depressed he felt.
Cut in half like a knife through whipped cream.
An odd, dilapidated wooden building near one of the corners of the square contrasted greatly with the gray stone.
He looked as if someone were about to reveal the secret of immortal life.
His skin was back to full color, his eyes no longer crisscrossed with red veins; he seemed to have gained fifteen pounds in twenty-four hours.
Newt gasped and jumped up, stumbling away from her.
It was, in fact, ridiculous.
"Why is everyone freaking out?
As soon as he escaped the immediate reach of the Grievers’ instruments, they gave up and retreated, disappearing into the Maze.
Thomas forced himself to eat; the way things were going, he needed to make sure he’d have strength to deal with whatever insane thing came his way next.
It had altered its course and was almost on him, reaching out with its clasping claw.
He made a mental note to watch out for nasty black hairs in his meals.
Oddly enough, seeing them this way, thinking all is well, has been the hardest thing for me to observe.
The slightest glow of early morning illuminated the Glade, turning everything dark blue and shadowed.
Thomas pushed Chuck behind him and faced the creature, holding out his spear as if that would ward it off.
Thomas took a deep breath andlooked back toward the crowd around the hole.
A dark-skinned boy frowned—the same one who’d welcomed him.
"One day you’ll all be grateful for what we’ve done for you.
"Thomas followed Minho into the small room and watched as he pulled a few boxes away from the back wall.
Looks like magic, but so does the sun disappearing.
A couple of them appeared to be just as fresh as the first one he’d examined.
They pulled him away from Gally, who jumped up, his face a ruddied mask of rage.
" Gears were starting to shift into place inside Thomas’s head as well, almost as if a prior memory was beginning to break loose.
"Newt looked at Thomas, confused.
I think we finally know for sure that the Grievers are programmed to only kill one of us each day.
He gripped the plant just enough to slow him down as he slid to the ground, ignoring the horrible burn.
Before Thomas had a chance to think, questions were rushing out of his mouth.
Then Minho said he had a special assignment from Newt, and more or less told Thomas to get lost, refusing to answer any of his questions.
Either way, you have been sent to a prison.
Still, he was having a hard time just sitting there; he desperately wanted to speak on his own behalf.
"The walls move all over the shuck place every evening—same time as our Doors close shut.
Denying the truth would solve nothing.
They dragged him across the floor; he fought them, squirmed, yelled to be iDocleftalone.
"Ain’t no questions till the end, you get me?
Gally was one of the boys holding on to the ropes, ready to hoist her, Alby, and Newt out of the Box.
" The kitchen was small but had everything one needed to make a hearty meal.
He lay in silence for the longest time, looking at the stars and listening to the soft murmurs of various conversations drifting across the Glade.
The guy is mentally whacked, and you better send someone right now to throw him in the Slammer.
What did it all mean?Alby leaned over to look in her face once more before they carried her off.
Thomas glanced over at Alby, who was staring at the floor, seemingly lost in his own gloomy thoughts.
"Sorry," he whispered, ignoring a dirty look from Newt.
Do you think they cry at night?"Thomas was completely shocked to realize his eyes had filled with tears.
Have I gone completely insane?Chuck lay down with a laugh.
"Thomas had already stopped moving, felt an icy chill.
The walls moved out in the Maze?
Newt looked at Teresa.
But he took a deep breath and forced himself to try to accept the situation.
Then, out of the corner of his eye, he noticed the other Gladers looking in the direction of the doors.
He just kept running.
He looked to Minho for his reaction.
I’m reservin’ my recommendation until I hear everyone out.
Big fat nasty one.
Then he realized others were entering through the remaining three Glade openings, all of them running and looking as ragged as the guy who’d just whisked by him.
A booming explosion of ripping wood and broken glass thundered from somewhere upstairs, shaking the whole house.
Thomas once again felt a pressing ache of confusion—hearing so many words and phrases that didn’t make sense.
"I think I’ve made my opinions pretty clear already.
This made Thomas even more curious, though he was just fine going back to the subject of Runners.
Minho, running full speed, disappeared into the Maze.
He stood with Newt in front of the barn of the Blood House, getting ready for his first training session with a Keeper.
His back struck a hard metal wall; he slid along it until he hit the corner of the room.
We live inside a place that seems to have no way out, surrounded by bloodthirsty monster -guards.
Sure about what?""Are they changed because they want to go back to their old life, or is it because they’re so depressed at realizing their old life was no better than what we have now?"Newt stared at him for a second, then looked away, seemingly deep in thought.
Up a winding flight of stairs.
About twenty feet across, the Map Room had concrete walls bare of any decoration.
They had indeed reached a way out of the Maze, but like Minho had said, it was nothing to get excited about.
""Well," Chuck said, looking down at his feet before returning his gaze to Thomas.
I can’t look into those eyes again, he thought.
"You’ll learn a lot in the next couple of days, start getting used to things.
"Well, Greenie, you survived First Day.
""Whatever," Minho said, "who gives a klunk about all that—just get on with the escape already.
Supplies cut, bloody gray skies, walls not closing.
""Done it before, haven’t you, Hercules?" Without smiling or even waiting for a response, Newt walked away, yelling at people to finish up and get inside the Homestead.
She looked so different now, awake and alert—standing.
"All things happen for a purpose," she said, any sign of malice now gone from her voice.
"I’ve never seen so many shanks acting like teat- suckin’ babies.
"Okay," he said simply, ready to follow.
"I know you," Gally added without looking back.
For some reason the clothing here surprised Thomas; it seemed like everyone should be wearing something more menacing—like prison garb.
Because no one who’d been stung and didn’t make it back by sunset has ever survived, we just assumed that was the point of no return—when it’s too late to get the Serum.
Then, with surprising speed, the Griever pushed itself back outside the shattered frame of the window and began descending toward the ground below.
Thomas covered his face and fell to the floor, kicking his legs out to scoot his body as far away as possible.
"Good that," Newt said, looking almost too agreeable.
"Figured I’d let ya sleep in after such a rough couple days.
The Gladers looked up to him.
It felt like a hundred years ago.
With the Grievers?The other Gladers murmured their conversations in hushed tones, an intense feeling of dreadful anticipation hanging over them like a patch of thick fog.
Minho stopped so abruptly Thomas almost ran him over.
"But Alby was already drifting off, nodding slightly as his eyes closed.
Thomas knew he was a smart kid—he somehow felt it in his bones.
"Chuck looked up at him, his eyebrows raised.
He ducked to avoid a low- hanging limb, almost falling.
As soon as Newt set off to go and talk to the girl, Thomas silently slipped away, hoping no one would notice him in the excitement.
""Six code words, who knows how many Grievers.
The sudden feeling of responsibility for his friends almost overwhelmed him—made it hard to run.
Chuck was in the group, and when he saw Thomas and the others he ran over, a look of excitement spread across his face.
He ran up to look over her shoulder and saw that she kept typing the word PUSH over and over, but nothing appeared on the screen.
Part animal, part machine, the Griever rolled and clicked along the stone pathway.
"We have to be the ones to do it," Thomas said as they leaned their backs against craggy trees, the once-green leaves already starting to turn gray from the lack of artificial sunlight.
Of all days, this might be the most important to get out there.
Where they always go.
His eyes popped back open when he realized she could maybe read his thoughts even when he wasn’t trying to communicate.
We can talk to each other in our freaking heads!" Saying it out loud almost made him feel ashamed, as if he’d just admitted he was a thief.
co doorway.
" Minho put his fingers to his lips, his eyes darting around to see ifanyone was looking at him.
Even after what he’d seen last night, even after witnessing the Griever through the window, he wanted to know.
Thomas shot to his feet, as did most of the others.
He felt like a coward, but he knew that any fighting—and any deaths—would be in vain if they didn’t get that code punched, the door to the Creators opened.
Don’t you bloody do it!"The rods on the right wall seemed to reach like stretched-out arms for their home, grasping for those little holes that would serve as their resting place for the night.
It felt thicker and more solid than he would’ve imagined, maybe a half-inch in diameter.
Only one door had a light coming through the crack at the bottom.
"No, I don’t think that’s what it means—the walls not closing.
"The boys kept walking, Minho almost looking happy, but something was nagging at Thomas.
"What?" Minho asked, mirroring Thomas’s thoughts exactly.
If we can fight off the Grievers long enough for someone to punch in the code and shut them down, then we can go through the door they come through.
Minho spotted a Griever disappearing around a corner ahead of them; and it didn’t come back.
At first he was terrified that they needed so many weapons, but he was relieved to see that the vast majority of it was covered with a thick layer of dust.
Whoever it was, he must’ve been one of the first to die, because his grave looked the oldest.
" He paused to look around, making sure they were all listening.
"No one ever understood what I saw, what the Changing did to me!
No one argued.
Sadness washed over him, almost as if he were reliving those few terrible minutes of awakening in darkness to the memory loss.
He made the choice himself.
Deep down he knew that Ben was only part of his many problems.
Thankfully, Chuck arrived with lunch at noon, relieving Thomas from his thoughts.
Ben’s head snapped back as he was jerked forward, the Keepers pushing the pole toward the Maze outside the Glade.
How many had died?
Then one stepped back and drew up his gun, aimed.
"Thomas had an itch in the back of his mind, the same one he’d felt the very first time in this room.
Totally gone.
With a start, Thomas realized it was the black- haired guy who’d given him the look of death earlier.
"Thomas laughed again, in disbelief that such a thing could be possible so soon after what they’d gone through.
But he was certain he hadn’t remembered anything about that when he’d gone through the Changing.
What anyone said.
" He finished, then slid the paper over to rest in front of Thomas.
Making the running easier somehow.
She pointed at the dirty square of glass, empty but for its greenish glow of life.
"Just get me out of the Maze, and I’ll be one happy dude.
Minho and the Runners have scoured the Maze, trying to find an exit or some use for that stupid code you guys came up with.
"Everyone knows what happened.
The other Grievers had already gathered in the courtyard and followed their companion toward the Maze.
Thomas almost laughed, it seemed so ordinary.
"Thomas waited for Chuck to laugh or smile, thinking it had to be a joke—who ever heard of someone being cut in half?
""Who do you think did it?" Thomas was hesitant to tell him about the possible discovery he and Teresa had made.
His guilt transformed into anger and blame.
Frypan—Newt told Thomas that the Cook had been one of the last Keepers to agree to go—was in charge of gathering all the food and figuring out a way to distribute it evenly among the packs.
He stopped when Newt did, right next to the massive wall towering above them like a skyscraper—another random image that floated in the murky pool of his memory wipe.
"What did you just say?""Huh?""You just called it a maze—you said, ‘same thing happens out in the maze.
Some of his fear melted away, but not enough to calm his racing heart.
Every last one of those who’d stayed behind and fought was covered in Griever sludge and human blood, their clothes ripped to shreds.
The light was dim, but any obstructions loomed as darker shadows and he was able to make his way quickly along.
Even the birds had quieted, like they’d gone to bed for the night, and the sound of insects was barely noticeable, or at least much less than normal.
He stared straight down, saw that the stone wall of the Maze went toward the ground in a sheer cliff until it disappeared into whatever lay far, far below.
A purpose for the code?Thomas paused, not really wanting to talk about it yet—not before he really gathered his thoughts.
Thomas was a Newbie, just a few days in the Glade, a few minutes in the Maze.
Then you turn into some kind of freaky jungle dude, climbing vines and tying people up on walls.
"Why aren’t you one?"Newt’s gaze returned to Thomas, sharply.
For Thomas, though, it all made sense now.
""Which one is this?" Thomas asked; he knelt down next to it, eager to get started.
"Thomas helped Minho as they scrabbled around the corners and crannies of the Maze, picking up as many loose stones as possible.
Thomas walked a few feet along the wall until he found a thick growth of ivy covering most of the stone.
As Newt leaned over to get a better look into the Box, the faint bleating of a goat in the distance echoed across the courtyard.
He couldn’t see how the mammoth walls could possibly be mobile—felt so sure of it he relaxed, thinking Chuck was just playing a trick on him.
Based on the time, breakfast should’ve already been served, people should be working.
Time to stay out there and see if anything opens up when the walls move.
"Where are we going?" Thomas asked, still feeling the weight of seeing those walls close, thinking about the maze, the confusion, the fear.
"What a night.
Thomas finally followed suit, Newt right beside him; everyone huddled against the far wall, staring at the window.
The walls had to be hundreds of feet high and formed a perfect square around them, each side split in the exact middle by an opening as tall as the walls themselves that, from what Thomas could see, led to passages and long corridors beyond.
He didn’t even have to look—he knew what Minho was going to say before he said it.
" He pointed at Thomas’s chest, almost tapping it.
"No sun for the plants," Newt said, "no supplies from the bloody Box—yeah, I’d say we’re shucked, all right.
He shuffled his body to the right as far as the plant would let him, then let go and grabbed another one.
It made Thomas feel a little better that the temporary Council Chair despised Gally almost as much as he did.
"She folded her hands in her lap, looked down at them.
Alby looked on the edge of death.
Thomas turned as he passed, his eyes riveted to the exhausted runner, unsure why this new development surprised him so much.
Then he looked up, took in the other Keepers.
Where’d all these weird words and phrases come from, anyway?" It seemed like they’d taken some other language and melded it with his own.
"With that the man made a few motions to his companions, then turned and ran out the big glass doors, his gun held rigidly before him.
"Well, where is it?""It’s almost suicide," Thomas said, knowing he was putting off the answer.
Thomas felt a sharp pang and closed his eyes as he sank deeper into the misery of the night.
It was a miracle Thomas hadn’t stabbed someone’s eye out with his spear.
"Chatter broke out, questions overlapping each other.
The instant the discarded slab hit the floor of the room, the glass of the window exploded inward like a swarm of crystal wasps.
My memory’s fading already, Tom.
Thomas found a tree in the Deadheads, one of the nicer ones on the edge of the forest with plenty of shade.
He glanced upward again, half expecting it to have changed back to normal.
There couldn’t be much good about the maze if these guys came back looking so weary and worn.
How different would things be right now if it weren’t for that one boy?
You’re too stupid—you’ve always been too stupid.
"Just hold on!" "Well, what’s wrong?" someone yelled back.
Then Winston and others.
The light was so dull now that he almost felt as if he were looking through black mist.
Newt folded his arms again, looked at him closely.
It looked like he wasn’t done keeping secrets after all.
"You’re bloody killin’ yourself !"Thomas could see the muscles in Newt’s arms flexing, veins popping out as he pulled at Alby’s hands, until finally, inch by inch, he was able to pry them away.
Dawn was beginning to make its mark, the sky seeming to have lightened considerably even in the last minute or so.
No one else knew the weird things Teresa had said, or accused him of.
Someone shook Thomas awake.
Alby didn’t bother looking.
" Teresa broke the stick in half.
Just when it grew unbearable—just as Thomas realized the Griever was right outside the window —everything fell silent.
The corridors out there looked much the same as the ones he’d seen from the window by the East Door early that morning.
The people who’d taken their lives away from them.
It was strange, but he hadn’t even really thought of himself that way.
He was young—probably the youngest of any in the group he’d seen so far, maybe twelve or thirteen years old.
Minho stood quickly, taking everyone off guard.
Eventually, they gave up and kept their distance.
Dawn had burst forth in all her glory, and Gladers milled about, readying for the day.
This one left Minho’s hand, sailed forward, almost in the exact center of the Cliff line, started its descent to the unseen ground far below.
co.
Thomas found Minho and Teresa talking to each other near the left side of the Door, going overthe hastily made plans to enter the escape code once they got into the Hole.
"No!" Newt yelled, running forward.
As Thomas got his bearings, he realized they were standing in a ten- foot-high stone cylinder.
He finally found him, crossing the Glade on his way to the Blood House.
It wasn’t until Chuck stopped right in front of him, panting to catch his breath, that he finally looked up.
The mental effort of speaking to her was already straining—he felt a headache forming like a bulge in his brain.
""I’ll tell you in a minute why I think I learned more than others," Thomas said, dreading that part of the story.
One by one they went until only he remained with Thomas and Teresa.
"For a Greenie, anyway.
"He’s finally whacked for good," Minho said, almost in a whisper.
But no one said a word; all eyes were glued to the girl, now lying there as if asleep, her chest rising and falling with shallow breaths.
"Why are you guys so secretive?""That’s just the way it is.
We’ve sworn our lives to fighting WICKED.
Every inch of his body hurt, inside and out; his limbs cried for him to quit running.
Alby spoke in a loud, almost ceremonious voice, looking at no one and everyone at the same time.
"Ain’t no way to start these conversations, you get me?
I did it!"The Keepers exchanged looks, shock clear in their wide eyes and raised eyebrows.
"Guess there won’t be another Newbie, huh?"Thomas relaxed, returned to a sitting position, surprised at how easily he’d been put back at ease.
Yeah, but this always gives me a headache.
If the world’s the way I saw it …" He trailed off, leaving an ominous silence.
Thomas thought, feeling his own anger light up.
If you’re gonna blabber your shuck mouth every time I say something, you can go ahead and bloody leave, because I’m not in a very cheerful mood.
"Minho pointed at the Maps in Thomas’s hand, letting out a frustrated sigh.
He followed Newt to the second door on the right and watched as the older boy knocked lightly; a moan sounded in reply.
Maybe we were meant all along to be the ones to reveal how to escape.
The thought surprised him, as if its source had been founded in actual memory, a wisp of light in the darkness of his mind.
We can’t afford to make things bloody worse than they already are.
Chuck brought two plates with sandwiches and carrots over to the table.
No one dies if they make it back in time to get the Serum.
Hearing her say that only made him worry more.
Then he shook his head and looked tiDocward.
He already felt a closeness that could only have come from knowing her before the memory-wiped existence of the Glade.
"If you’re looking for a goodnight kiss, forget it.
When they’d reached a spot about thirty feet off the ground, Thomas stopped, swaying on the vine he’d tied around his chest.
Quickly, Thomas grabbed other vines, ripping them away from the wall, creating a series of climbing ropes.
The source of the sounds he’d been hearing made sense now.
He selected a short silvery dagger with a rubber grip, then one with a long black blade.
I’m with Thomas one hundred percent.
I’ve been here two years, and I’ve never seen anything like it.
" He turned and looked at the Keepers, who’d started to gather their respective work groups.
Seeing it all now—the beast matched with the sounds—Thomas couldn’t think of any nightmare that could equal this hideous thing coming toward him.
They ended up near the back of the Homestead—that was what Chuck called the leaning structure of wood and windows—in a dark shadow between the building and the stone wall behind it.
If your girlfriend gets lonely for you, I’ll give her some lovin’.
Newt turned to look him dead in the eye.
"Well … I can’t make it all out, but …" Clint looked at Thomas again.
He was looking left and right, though the collar around his neck prevented him from seeing the pole and Keepers behind him.
Thomas almost balked, not sure how to say what he was thinking.
Then, just as they’d all expected, came the mechanical, haunted sounds of the Grievers outside.
The sounds grew louder—the awful, awful sounds.
The room continued its ascent, swaying; Thomas grew immune to the ceaseless rattling of the chains that pulled him upward.
He didn’t look back, didn’t bother answering.
"But a commotion outside the Homestead shifted their attention away from the conversation.
Thomas finally snuck away from the Builders and helped Minho, carrying up boxes of knives and barbwire-wrapped clubs.
"Still gives me the chills thinkin’ I might have gone through the Changing.
Was that really just yesterday?Someone tapped him on the elbow; he looked over to see Chuck by his side again.
"Seems kind of dangerous to have all this stuff," he said.
He pushed it away, knowing they were nowhere near safe yet.
A Griever spun directly in his path; a boy, his face hidden from sight, was clutched in its claws, stabbing viciously into the thick, whalish skin, trying to escape.
"What you did was half brave and half bloody stupid.
And he still stepped out there, just as the Door was closing, only caring that two people needed help.
Just one person again, he thought.
The sky was a dull slab of gray—not the natural pale light of morning.
"Thomas followed him, surprised at how heavy his breaths had already become.
Thomas and Minho found nothing but stone walls and ivy.
"Because now we have to solve it.
"The two guards nodded, then walked away, Teresa in tow.
Newt had finally snapped out of his daze and pushed Gally away.
Thomas was surprised.
Closed, they were evenly spaced, two to a wall.
""He’s bad, he’s bad, he’s bad …," Ben was whispering now, almost chanting.
"Ya know, it was really stupid for us to sleep in here tonight.
The dog, a pesky black Lab named Bark, took quickly to Thomas, hanging at his feet the entire tour.
The word made him feel a rush of panic, and the spark of hope the meal had brought him fizzled with a silent hiss.
"Anyone else go through that?"But Newt’s face was blank.
He made a promise to himself to beextra nice to Zart.
At some point a knife had made an appearance, gripped in his right hand.
Chuck noticed and asked the question that was on Thomas’s mind.
"Minho looked at Thomas carefully.
Blue eyes shone through an otherwise pitiful face, flabby and flushed.
Newt, instead of showing anger, asked Alby to explain.
The jungles were gone, but the insects weren’t.
As she walked toward the group, she neither smiled nor frowned—it was almost as if she didn’t notice or care they were standing there.
No way, Thomas thought.
It made Thomas feel off-kilter, as if the urge to sleep that grew steadily with every passing minute were somehow unnatural.
" He took another peek, then quickly looked over his shoulder.
" They had reached the door and Newt gave him a gentle push outside.
"We’ve already run through the whole section.
Despite all his ideas—all the things he’d pitched to Minho—he wasn’t eager to change how things had been done for the last two years.
The Grievers at least seemed to be moving slowly through the Maze, giving him time.
He still hadn’t spotted the sun, but it looked like it was about to pop over the eastern wall at any minute.
" His hands were perfectly steady as he held the bow, almost as if he had propped it against a branch for support.
"Thomas was so relieved that Alby thought he was okay, he only heard about half of what the older boy had just said.
He resolved to do just as Newt said, hoping it would keep his mind off things.
Thomas almost collapsed from the sudden rush of terror.
A large, bulbous creature the size of a cow but with no distinct shape twisted and seethed along the ground in the corridor outside.
His eyes finally focused through the initial blindness of fear, and he realized it was Minho, with one of Alby’s arms draped across his shoulders, practically dragging the boy along behind him.
We tried to see if they made something when put together—of course we did that.
Come every week for two years, same time, same day.
But even that wasn’t as bad as the heavy emotional weight of what he’d been through the previous night.
"Newt stopped so suddenly Thomas almost ran into him.
A few snickers escaped the crowd, and Gally looked around, his face bright red.
" She motioned behind her with a thumb.
The language was odd, and none of the boys seemed to care whether he lived or died.
"Over two years, and so few dead.
"  Minho sighed.
No one liked him except for his few shuck cronies.
Everyone gobbled up his food and usually begged for more.
They were even more menacing in the faded gray light.
Thomas thought about how he’d always felt a connection to her, ever since she arrived in the Glade.
As Thomas was settling into the soft mattress for the night, he was interrupted.
Their faces showed complete awe, as if they were watching two ghosts strolling through a graveyard.
The boy’s pace was picking up, but Thomas stayed on his heels, surprised at how familiar he felt with the directions, usually even leaning into turns before Minho showed the way.
The place reeked of dust and mildew—a big contrast to the pleasant smells outside.
A chorus of questions filled the air as everyone began pushing forward to get a look into the small opening.
"I’m sure we have a lot to do before the Grievers come back tonight— if they don’t come during the day.
Thomas watched in anticipation as Newt and Alby took positions on opposite sides of the shaft doors—a crack split the metal square right down the middle.
"I already knew that, but what about—" "Tried it.
It went nuts and stung Alby, but then ran away.
The guy gave him the willies.
"Somehow we made it to sunrise, or we would’ve had ten more on our butts before long.
"A girl?""I got dibs!""What’s she look like?""How old is she?"Thomas was drowning in a sea of confusion.
The sounds of the onrushing Grievers grew closer, but he had to see.
Finally, he was left alone, his head resting on the softest pillow his limited memory could recall.
Not too many in these parts can say they’ve been stung.
He could feel her resolve.
"Yeah, tried that one.
"You’re not half bad, shank.
Winston looked surprised at the acknowledgment that he’d said anything.
Minho seemed to know exactly what he was doing, where he was going; he never paused to think about which way they should run.
They’re huge, and they look like they’ve been standing here for a thousand yearsiDoc.
"One … two … three!"They lifted her with a quick jerk, almost throwing her up in the air—she was obviously a lot lighter than they’d thought—and Thomas almost shouted at them to be more careful.
Newt was taller than Alby too, but looked to be a year or so younger.
" Thomas looked around one more time, embarrassed, confused, angry.
"And stay away from me, you little slinthead.
"A couple of hours later, the doors having reopened, rumbling and grumbling and shaking the ground until they were finished, Thomas sat at a worn, tilted picnic table outside the Homestead.
Thomas felt his heart tremble, hoped it wasn’t someone he knew.
"Looks like you’re not giving me much choice on that one.
But when his eyes lifted, all he saw was a very weak-looking teenage boy lying in his bed, eyes closed.
A bright light on the end of one arm pointed directly at Thomas, only this time, the beam didn’t move away.
It was strange to know that the night grew later, that darkness should’ve swallowed the world around them, but to see only the pale gray light outside.
They’ve been analyzing it the wrong way!"Teresa gripped the bars now, her knuckles white, her face pressed against the iron rods.
" Alby showed the slightest hint of a smile, a bare crack in his usually hard face.
We somehow got it into our klunk heads that once the Doors closed, you were done—end of story.
" She looked past him at the Homestead, then focused on him again.
"Am I … replacing someone?
"So what are they gonna do with him?"                                                         "Already had a Gathering of the Keepers this morning—made a unanimous decision by the sounds of it.
Another snap, this time louder, almost like someone had broken a stick over their knee.
Someone, he couldn’t tell who, obeyed Newt’s order; he was being carried across the courtyard, through the front door of the Homestead, down the shattered hall, into a room, placed on a couch.
"He lightly slapped Thomas’s shoulder, then stepped back, gesturing up the stairs.
Thomas looked over at Newt, who nodded.
No movement, no light, no sound.
Newt let out a long sigh.
Everything was provided for us, and the problem was laid out as one of the most common puzzles known to civilization—a maze.
He was anxious to defend himself and almost broke his silence for the first time—but before he could get a word in, Gally was talking again.
Without fail, everyone looked away.
co Newt leaned in to take a look, and Thomas crept over to join him.
He looked over at Teresa, about to say something, but stopped when he saw the expression on her pale face—he’d never seen terror present itself so starkly.
He walked past Ben and along the pole, picking it up off the ground as he slid its length through his palm and fingers.
" "What?" Thomas was shocked—he hadn’t meant it that way.
Shuck it all and kiss a Griever goodnight.
But whether one person or many would die, he had no clue.
He’d just rounded the corner when Gally came screaming out of the Homestead, looking like a ferocious beast on the loose.
Such odd glimpses of his past had almost stopped surprising him.
"Someone snickered and Thomas quit talking, hoping he’d gotten his point across.
"That first night, when you were bragging about being a Runner and all that klunk—shuck it, I was laughing inside so hard.
It’ll only make it worse, he’d said, and would not be swayed.
If there’s some kind of optical illusion hiding an exit from this place, I don’t wanna be the one who screws up when the first shank tries to jump into it.
He took another deep breath of the pleasant air and pulled himself out of his thoughts—there was a lot more he wanted to see.
Otherwise, Newt had ordered all lights extinguished despite the pale, deathly glow of their new sky—no sense attracting any more attention than necessary.
Anyway, as long as you know old Chucky is proud of you.
How could anyone ever be happy in a life like this?
He shook it away.
""A place we’ve never looked before?" Alby asked.
The only sounds were the eerie moans and whirrs of machinery coming from the Grievers, sitting there as if enjoying the little trap they’d set for the humans.
"Newt folded his arms; he looked exasperated.
"A contemplative look came over Chuck.
"All four of them looked over at the steel doors attached to the ground.
"More rumblings broke out, and Newt wrote something on his pad, shaking his head the whole time—which gave Thomas a tinge of hope.
"What happened?" he asked, trying to put aside his anger.
Though no one admitted it, Thomas bet most of them were banking on the theory that only one person would be killed by the Grievers, and they figured their chances o f not being the unlucky sap were decent.
The second thing he learned about himself, as if the night in the Maze hadn’t proved it already, was that his body was in perfect shape.
"Minho sighed, clearly irritated, then muttered something under his breath.
Thomas swung, this time from above his head, throwing every bit of strength into the attack.
The creature disappeared from sight, a shadow swallowed by more shadow.
"Teresa?" he finally asked through the barred window of the lightless cell.
Alby, on the ground, looked worse, his clothes ripped, his arms covered with cuts and bruises.
The thing was already ten feet away by the time he realized it wasn’t a rat at all—it was more like a lizard, with at least six legs scuttling the long silver torso along.
Minho hit a switch and several rows of fluorescent lights flickered until they came on full strength, revealing the room in detail.
"What about the Track-hoes?" Thomas asked as he yanked out a huge weed, clumps of dirt swaying on the roots.
Across the courtyard from there stood wooden pens holding sheep and pigs and cows.
" Thomas knew what he meant, but waited for Minho’s explanation anyway.
" Thomas opened his eyes again and forced himself to sit up in the bed in which he lay, pushing his back against the wall and stretching out his legs.
Thomas, concerned for Alby despite his recent ill-tempered ways, turned back to Minho and repeated his question.
"We put you in the Slammer at night to keep you safe—brought you back here during the days.
No one said a word.
Newt looked at the window absently.
Tonight we’re taking the fight back to the Creators, no matter what we have to go through to get there.
A couple of blankets had been placed over him during the night—someone playing the Glade Mother.
Newt sat down and motioned to Zart.
Whatever the explanation, whatever that had been in the sky, the real sun or not, it was gone.
" He’d decided the night before not to tell anyone else how strangely familiar the place seemed, the odd feeling that he’d been there before— that he could remember things about it.
Catalysts to study your reactions, your brain waves, your thoughts.
"Well, ain’t that just cheery?"Thomas turned to walk away, but Newt called out to him.
But the Runners have been looking at it wrong this whole time.
Dead!"Thomas didn’t know which he felt more strongly at that moment—anger at Minho or pity for him.
Every Glader going in and out the door gave Thomas a stare; a few came up and offered congratulations.
We may not look it, but around these parts we’re adults.
Newt finally gave up, collapsing backward in defeat.
The code seemed like their only hope now, and he resolved to focus on that.
Let them do the fighting—we have to get through that Hole.
Even from where Thomas was standing, it looked surprisingly strong.
Tried to send a slinthead Greenie back in the Box one time—thing wouldn’t move till we took him out.
Probably —surely someone had told him.
Newt gave Thomas a questioning look, but Thomas could only return it with a shrug.
He cried out as someone jerked him backward, ripping his hand out of Teresa’s—he saw her spin around just in time to watch as he slammed into the ground, throwing up a spray of water.
Thomas winced; Frypan had gone too far with that recommendation, almost invalidating his well-stated opinion of the whole mess.
At least twenty feet across, the break in the wall went all the way to the top, far above.
His hands began to slip and slide on the vines.
" Minho stood up holding a pair of sleek silver ones.
The creeping shadows of the walls didn’t reveal the time or direction—it could be early morning or late afternoon.
They both looked exhausted.
But it was already gone.
Yet of the two of them, Minho had broken down and panicked, only to run off at the first sign of trouble.
Most of the kids wandered away then, each one giving Thomas a lingering look before they walked off.
"We always make the Newbies start with the bloody Slicers.
It took all of his effort, but he said one last thing before the darkness took him for good.
"They’ll only kill you one a night … their stupid Variables …"Thomas listened in awe, trying to suppress his fear so he could memorize everything the crazed boy said.
After one day.
And don’t let anyone fool you.
Thomas watched on as at first no one seemed to hear or notice Newt at all.
"Thomas looked in that direction.
I’ll freaking work every Glader to the bone studying those things.
"She looked away then, gazing out her window.
All was a blur, bloody and gray and flashes of steel; Thomas tried not to look left or right, only ahead, through the narrow gap formed by the Gladers.
He headed out for the northeast corner, toward the big rows of tall green cornstalks that looked ready to harvest.
He looked about the room like a rabid dog searching for someone to bite.
So somebody can sacrifice himself to save the others while we run to the Hole.
Deeper it went, its red light glowing brighter as the surroundings darkened.
Thomas almost pushed him with another question, but Newt finally continued.
He looked up, looked side to side, examined the massive slabs of stone as the uneasy feeling blossomed into outright dread.
" "Bad, bad, bad, bad, bad …" Ben smiled; his teeth seemed to glow, greenish in the pale liDocght.
.
coThomas wanted to look away, get out of there.
You look bloody awful.
A pocket of air seemed to float in his chest every time they spoke, a swelling that half annoyed and half thrilled him.
"Thomas could see that both Minho and Newt were as surprised as he was.
You’ve proven more in one night than most trainees do in weeks.
After another couple of bites, Thomas finally asked the question that had been bothering him.
"Someone burned all the Maps.
And for now, almost was good enough.
A group of Gladers stood at the front door of the house, shouting to be heard over each other.
At least, we think that’s when, because we never really hear walls moving any other time.
"Thomas’s grogginess instantly washed away, replaced with relief—it surprised him how much joy the information brought.
What did I ever do to this kid?He looked up, wanting answers, but Alby was already gone, a trembling branch the only sign he’d ever stood there in the first place.
The thing looked deadly.
The Gladers compressed into a tighter group around him, everyone facing outward, huddled together in the center of the T intersection.
Thomas couldn’t believe he was still looking upon a human being—the madness in Ben’s eyes, the phlegm flying from his mouth, the pale skin stretched taut across his veins and bones.
How do we know it was the Greenie who tied Alby up there?"Gally paused; no one said a word for several seconds, and panic rose inside Thomas’s chest.
But Alby didn’t answer or slow down, and as they got closer to the box Thomas could see that dozens of kids were running around the courtyard.
Thomas was shocked by the question.
""Every lovin’ thing in the universe," he replied, then fell silent as he stared off into space for a long moment.
The rest of what he had to say almost seemed easy now.
"But I thought the Grievers only came out at night.
We’re already late.
Bodies scrambled everywhere, people on top of people, groaning and squirming in confusion as they tried to push away from each other.
He seemed genuinely interested and ready to understand.
Wide eyes watched him as they walked all the way to the back seat and plopped down; they huddled together.
Chuck was a little annoying, but there was something about him that made things seem less terrible.
It looked as if a tornado had touched down right in the middle of the room.
"Chuck finally quit gawking and made eye contact with Thomas.
The woman yelped when one of the rescuers grabbed her with both hands and yanked her off of Thomas, who recovered his wits and scrambled to his feet.
Chuck interrupted his thoughts.
I told you we needed you!" Thomas scrambled to his feet and joined the other two in a group hug, almost delirious.
The world seemed to spin, a swirling mist of faces and color and light.
There were numbered circles running down the left side, one to six.
It seemed like a monster, a horror from a nightmare, but Thomas knew it had to be a Glader, someone who’d completely lost his mind.
Newt looked confused.
" Minho finished up his meal and put his lunch box away.
"Thomas looked straight ahead, feeling so hopeless he almost slowed to a stop.
Thomas found most of the Gladers standing near the entrance to the Box, pointing at the dead sky, everyone talking at once.
"Alby’s eyes fluttered open—bloodshot orbs that glistened in the light.
The Griever’s spikes tore into the stone, throwing shredded ivy and rock chips in every direction.
The floor of the courtyard looked like it was made of huge stone blocks, many of them cracked and filled with long grasses and weeds.
He sat up, rubbing both hands on the ground, and he finally got a good look at where they’d arrived.
He thought about flashlights and his memory.
Thomas stared in shock as two of the newcomers tackled the WICKED woman to the floor.
Get kissed goodnight.
Steeling his nerves, he tapped his spear against the stone ground, then planted his left foot on the very edge of the Cliff and jumped, catapulting up and into the twilight air.
A few clinks later the door swung wide open.
"So … it takes you a whole day to run through these little squares?""Hilarious.
Thomas could barely listen anymore, anticipating the comments from the last two Keepers, Gally and Minho.
He imagined beetle blades out there, helping the creatures find their way.
Groaning, he forced his eyes open, squinting at first.
Gladers ran about, everyone talking at once.
Nothing about them seemed new or interesting—he knew what they were called, what they normally ate, what they looked like.
And where does it come from?""Just what it sounds like, shank.
The nasty creature was terrifying to think about, but he wondered why finding a dead one was such a big deal.
Ben crouched, ready to spring for another attack.
They’d made it back.
It was useless—the greasy stuff covered every inch of the stone; he couldn’t grip anything.
"If all else fails," Newt said, interrupting Thomas’s thoughts, "we’ll send ya to the Grievers—get ya stung so you can go through the Changing.
Chuck stumbled backward, then looked up at Thomas, his eyes so full of fright Thomas felt something shatter in his heart.
He looked like he’d just run twenty miles, face red, skin covered in sweat, clothes soaked.
And they close up every night.
Twelve jointed legs ran along the length of its bottom, spread out, making the thing look like iDocasleeping.
" Thomas kept his eyes riveted to the area of the invisible floating square, trying to burn the distance and location in his mind, remember exactly where it was.
And the air had brightened ever so slightly; he could make out more of the details of the Maze than he’d been able to just minutes before.
He looked as confused as Thomas felt.
"The Doors close in two minutes," Newt said, a statement so succinct and final it seemed to hang in the air like a burial shroud caught in a puff of wind.
Too busy makin’ lovey eyes to bother lookin’ around?
No one looked at Gally, breathing but still.
It climbed the opposite wall, then leaped at the thick-glassed window with a loud thump.
There has to be some kind of hidden exit.
The leader didn’t stop moving until they reached a huge bus, its sides dented and scarred, most of the windows webbed with cracks.
There were only thoughts of Chuck.
They stood at the opposite end of the long, dark hallway from the usual staircase, the one Thomas had climbed on his very first day to see Ben.
""So it ran away from you guys?" From what Thomas had seen only a few nights before, he couldn’t imagine it.
He gestured for Thomas to take his place and look through the window.
No, I love things made out of blubber and steel.
No one else said a word, most of them staring at Chuck’s body without expression, as if they’d moved far beyond feeling.
He turned and faced Alby, still propped against the stone wall, now only a mound of shadow in the darkness.
Thomas looked up at the enormous walls covered in thick vines—desperation had finally clicked him into problem-solving mode.
Screaming, he kicked and pushed and thrashed, throwing his body into a roll, trying to get away from them.
The sore-riddled woman had gotten to her feet, was sprinting toward the front of the bus, waving her arms wildly, screaming something drowned out by the sounds of the storm.
Thomas squeezed his eyes against the blinding light of the sun as he emerged from the woods.
He’d now been at the Glade for roughly twenty-four hours.
I’d expect more maturity from someone who’s passed the Maze Trials.
He was done.
How could these walls move?
The next hour or so was a blur of sights and sounds for Thomas.
Strangely enough, he felt his fear whisked away like a swarm of gnats caught in the wind, replaced by an intense curiosity.
Obviously the Griever woke up, but what happened?"Minho had already put his backpack on.
"Thomas rolled his eyes ever so slightly at Minho—so tired of Alby’s attitude.
"You better stop this nonsense, before others hear about it.
co.
You’re shameful, and any one of you who stays here is no better.
"I bet Minho’s the one who actually got rid of the stupid things.
He looked back into the Maze, at the closing wall.
More hallways.
The anticipation of fighting was almost worse than the fear of it.
"Looks like a big gray ceiling—close enough you could almost touch it.
Ben’s final screams were cut off when the walls closed with a terrible boom.
A maze?
The sounds of shuffling feet echoed up the walls and the red lights of the beetle blades flashed more menacingly in the ivy—the Creators were certainly watching, listening.
Go, one shank’ll die.
Sounded like three or four of them were just outside.
"Yeah, anyway," Minho continued.
" Thomas closed his eyes, searched the darkness of his thoughts, seeking her face in that emptiness.
To bother noticing what freaking time it is!"Thomas looked at his watch, realizing with horror what he’d missed, knowing what Alby was about to say before he said it.
Alby’s eyes narrowed; his mouth pulled into a tight grin that didn’t look like it had anything to do with humor.
Unable to stop its momentum, the Griever zoomed straight past him before it shuddered to a halt—Thomas noticed the thing was moving a lot faster now.
He couldn’t remember much, but something told him he’d never disliked someone so strongly.
Emptiness ate away at his insides, quickly replaced by a sadness that hurt his heart.
He scanned the compound of the Glade, this new place of nightmares where he seemed destined to live.
No one said it, but Thomas knew it wouldn’t be long before the Doors closed.
I … It’s better thisway….
As Newt and Alby gathered the Keepers and put them in charge of making assignments and getting their groups inside the Homestead within the hour, Thomas felt like nothing more than a spectator, not sure how he could help.
"Man— what a way to wake up.
A short, pudgy boy fidgeted back and forth on his feet, looking up at Thomas with wide eyes.
Then the leader and Newt walked off, and Thomas was relieved to see Chuck coming his way.
However, if there was one thing his gut told him, it was not to admit to any doubt.
They reached the huge split that led outside to more stone pathways.
And then something rounded the corner up ahead, and came toward them.
She looks like she will.
Relief washed through him an instant later when he realized it was Newt and a group of Gladers.
The grave markers had been painted white, but by someone in an obvious hurry—gelled globs coveredthem and bare streaks of wood showed through.
They got to work, tracing from original Maps to wax paper, one by one, trying to keep it clean and correct while hurrying as fast as possible.
""Alby’s the one who won’t let the girl out," Newt said with a nod toward the Homestead.
More than anything, he wanted to be alone.
"Like you said—stay here, one shank’ll die tonight.
He hoped Alby would say what he wanted and be done with it.
"Minho had looked him square in the face for the first time with that last sentence, and Thomas scooted back a few inches before he could stop himself.
The third hour was the hardest for Thomas.
Newt went after him, right on his heels, and then the rest of the Gladers followed, a tight pack of roaring boys charging ahead to a bloody battle, weapons raised.
""He’s not one of us!" Ben shouted.
He picked them up and settled in, snuggling up against the comforting corner where the stone walls met in a mass of soft ivy.
Thomas dodged to the left, kept running.
"No way I’m not going with ya.
So back off!"Alby leaned back slightly, stared absently at Thomas for several seconds.
Minho’s forehead creased in anger.
The subjects will be allowed one full night’s sleep before Stage 2 implementation.
As long as everyone fights.
They’d then tossed the loose ends over the Cliff, until they hit the Griever Hole, where now six or seven vines ran from the stone edge to an invisible rough square, hovering in the empty sky, where they disappeared into nothingness.
It worried him—if Minho gave up, they were all in big trouble.
"There’s too many weird things going on, and it all started when this shuck-face Greenie showed up.
"Aren’t you supposed to quit calling me that?" "What, bloody piggies?"Thomas forced a laugh and shook his head.
Down another hallway.
"Thomas groaned inwardly as he stepped inside and saw the one piece of furniture—an ugly, rickety chair with one leg obviously shorter than the rest, probably on purpose.
The feeling—the epiphany—was a strange one, foreign and familiar at the same time.
Thomas turned to look at Newt: limping along as well as he could, he’d only made it halfway to Thomas.
"Alby looked at his watch.
Fear, loneliness, desperation, sadness, even the slightest hint of joy.
"You shanks ready?" Minho asked when they came up.
"What do you think WICKED stands for, anyway?"Thomas felt like he’d been hit in the stomach.
"What?"Minho took a full three minutes to explain, starting with the Griever they followed and ending with the results of their rock-throwing experiment.
They threw enough rocks to cover the entire left half of the area in front of them, covering the distance anyone—or anything—could possibly jump.
Thomas shook his head and looked back into the Maze.
Thomas watched as Minho tried desperately to get him back on his feet, then, finally giving up, started to drag the boy across the stone floor by the arms.
"Everything came together so quickly in Thomas’s mind, he almost heard an audible click, as if the pieces all snapped into place at once.
The ivy was especially thick there; it made the world seem green and lush, hiding the hard, impenetrable stone.
None of us remember anything, and we’re bloody sick of you reminding us.
Twilight fell upon the Glade and Alby’s screams continued to haunt the air.
Ah, my Knight in Shining Armor.
They hit a dirt floor, and Thomas couldn’t see a thing until Minho turned on a single lightbulb by pulling a string.
"What do you call those big openings?" Chuck pointed up at the enormously tall gaps in the walls.
"Winston found him out here, half dead, the Map Room blazing.
"What about Alby?""Who knows?" Newt responded, looking around the Glade, observing the Keepers and their groups.
Having had his tour cut short, he decided to take a walk around the Glade on his own and get a better look and feel for the place.
Yes, I’m perfectly capable of remembering—"A loud bang from above and behind them cut her off, made Thomas jump.
Newt finally saw his friend hanging in the ivy, and looked back at Thomas.
"Newt gave him a suspicious look.
He wouldn’t quit until he’d solved the puzzle and found a way home.
It was too dark to make out clearly, but odd lights flashed from an unknown source, revealing blurs of silver spikes and glistening flesh.
I’m done.
Hate to say it, but if one of us dies, that’s better than all of us.
Sleep felt miles away, and he couldn’t shake the despair and hopelessness that coursed through his body and mind—the temporary joy of Chuck’s trick on Gally had long since faded away.
Soon as we’re done eating, I need to find him and throw his butt in jail.
"First the sky, now this.
What if they’re supposed to compare the Maps to other sections …" He trailed off, feeling like he was on the cusp of something.
There’s no way we can ask the Runners to risk staying out there—no way.
I mean, last few nights, sitting in the Homestead, just waiting for a Griever to come in and steal one of us was the worst thing I’ve ever done.
"There’re forty-one of us.
He almost stopped walking altogether when he spotted Gally up ahead, arms folded and glaring, but he kept moving.
"Hey, Clint," Newt said, sounding comfortable, like he’d stopped by to visit many times before.
They’d wiped his memory and put him inside a gigantic maze.
Finally, he made it to the southwest quarter, near the forest.
Thomas turned to see him pointing at the Griever Hole—another creature was making its way through.
But Thomas could think of only one thing.
"Hurry!"Thomas motioned for Teresa to do it.
Could be dead in an hour—I don’t know how long it takes if you don’t get the Serum.
Someone sprinted past Thomas, bumped him.
Thomas was so surprised by the random statement that he turned away from the Grievers, looked at the boy.
But its body kept churning, trying to squeeze its way inside.
Thomas would have to convince him somehow that stress had finally overwhelmed him and a good night’s rest had solved everything.
In fact, with the freaking walls not closing anymore, I think we should try your idea—stay out there overnight and do some deeper exploring.
" He trailed off, already confused at what order he should tell things in.
Lines crossed each other, up and down, so much so that what Thomas held in his hands looked like a checkered grid.
"Thomas quietly sighed in relief.
" Minho pulled out two chairs and sat in one of them.
If those shanks don’t make it back …" He paused, seeming hesitant to say what everyone was thinking.
Gally was an idiot, but he couldn’t possibly be stupid enough to stay out in the Maze all night.
Just try and avoid being killed, survive, whatever.
But now he was gone, Banished to the world of the Grievers, taken to wherever they took their prey, victim to whatever was done there.
Thomas nodded, doing his best to say yes with his eyes, until Newt finally took his hand away, then leaned back on his heels.
Before Thomas could look up from tying his shoes, a plastic wristwatch dropped into his lap.
But now Chuck was gone.
He thought about his conversation with Chuck, wondered how it would feel to have parents say good night to you.
Med-jack said you were there one second and buggin’ gone the next.
Sorry to break it to you, but we are strangers.
So—" But before he could finish his sentence the rumble of the walls opening for the day cut him off.
Alby hung there, seemingly lifeless, now three feet higher than he’d been five minutes earlier.
Everything was weird enough already.
Newt gave Gally a hard stare, then continued.
"There’s gotta be a way out of this place—we just have to push it, stay out in the Maze longer.
"Chuck, what’s a Gathering?"He looked proud to know the answer.
"Thomas felt the heavy truth of it, but pushed back anyway.
Nor did he hear any more sounds from that direction.
The thought ended his brief moment of calm, stirring in his mind a million possibilities of what might live in the maze outside, all of them terrifying.
Maybe he’d had his one and only turn of bad luck.
"How many have died, then?"Minho stared at the ground, crouched with one forearm on a knee.
Slowly, he let go and backed away.
Don’t you think we would’ve noticed if it were spelling out freaking words?""Maybe it’s too hard to see with the naked eye, just comparing one day to the next.
Newt had said they were supposed to have come back by noon, just enough time for them to get to the dead Griever, explore for an hour or two, then return.
Giving up, he lay back down, hoping no one would bother him.
He was already moving as he said it, somehow not feeling so exhausted anymore.
"The sun flares couldn’t have been predicted.
At the last second before collision, just as he got a close look at the metal and hair and slime, Thomas planted his left foot and dove to the right.
Newt was there, too, but sat alone, ignoring everybody.
The others kept the same pace, working feverishly.
And then it consumed him; he felt his mind taken by the mist, felt memories flood into his thoughts.
It seemed to take forever, Gladers pushing and scrambling their way up the three stairs and into the seats.
Minho looked exhausted, but he started defending his proposal.
Thomas felt one final moment of trepidation, a quick slice of fear through his body, and then it vanished.
Are you done?""Yes, I’m done.
He pulled on it, and with the sound of thick paper ripping apart, the vine came unattached from the wall—more and more as Thomas stepped away from it.
"You guys really have this all thought out, don’t you?""Couple of years runnin’ your butt off every day, you figure out what you need and ask for it.
The walls were really closing— trapping him inside the Glade.
"I found a dead one.
All as nasty as the one you peeped on last night.
"All right, Greenie," Alby said, looking much better as he sat in the middle of the semicircle of chairs, next to Newt.
Surprise, surprise—no exits.
The sky did look like a ceiling.
But check you out—you look brand-new!"Thomas could only imagine how non-great he looked.
A few seconds later the shadow stopped; the light settled to a standstill, casting three unmoving planes of brightness into the room.
Did you ever compare sections to other sections?"Minho rubbed his chin, nodding.
By the time he’d crossed the threshold into the Glade, the Doors were only minutes away from closing for the night.
But he was going to do everything possible to make sure Chuck wasn’t one of them.
" Thomas had the same strange urge he’d had the night before—to reach out and take one of her hands.
Despite his lack of memory, he was sure he’d just been through the most traumatic night of his life.
"You two shanks are the Med-jacks—figure it out.
He willed his eyes to adjust as he squinted toward the light and those speaking.
He looked up at Teresa with a sunken heart.
Inside the room, Newt and Alby crouched over someone lying on a bed.
That’s all you—""Who sent me here?" Thomas demanded, fear finally giving way to anger.
"Minho nodded once, a steel look of resolve hardening his features.
All I know is I saw two people struggling to get inside these walls and they couldn’t make it.
Thomas couldn’t tell if he’d meant for the others to hear him.
As he looked into the dark recesses of the Maze, he searched his mind for a solution.
" He stood up and headed out to look.
It’s the only way out of here—we can do it, I swear.
cor the second time in twenty- four hours, Chuck had nailed it.
He looked down at his watch—it was a full hour past his mandatory waking time.
"There’s a computer station in a place we’ve never looked before.
"A long pause followed, as if the three of them were trying to come up with an explanation for the girl.
The Runner balanced himself against the wall, gave both of them a cold look.
This hurt Thomas’s feelings, but he left anyway, really wanting to talk to Newt about something else.
We’re gonna solve this thing, get out of here.
All three of them looked at him, annoyed, as if he had no right to speak.
Doesn’t mean we always getwhat we want from the Creators.
" He paused, gathering his thoughts one last time.
Not cloudy, not twilight, not the early minutes of dawn.
He sat down at the table and drew up the day’s Map based on his memory and notes, Minho looking over his shoulder the whole time, giving pointers.
""Be careful," Chuck said, his tone quickly melting into genuine concern.
The chorus of voices had grown silent, but someone spoke as they yanked him over the sharp edge of the dark box.
" "Time to be a bloody hero again?"Thomas looked at Newt sharply, hurt by the rebuke.
"It’s like if you tried to ride a bicycle here—if they had one.
Couldn’t something be done for him?
Thomas leaned back against the rough rock, overcome by disbelief at what he had just done.
I mean … I remember riding one, but not learning.
No one’s ever become a Runner in their first month, much less their first week.
You’re way ahead of me and everybody else.
His eyes were deep pockets of sorrow, sunken, dark.
We’ll find out in a few hours.
Get them to the Cliff and the Hole so—"The sounds of the Grievers revving to life cut him off.
"He’s locked up in the Slammer, a huge bandage covering half his head.
""No way," Alby said.
"I think the Creators want us to know there’s no way out.
Next to each one was a word written in big blocky letters.
He pushed off the wall with both feet as hard as he could, swinging his body away from it just as the Griever charged in with its claw and needles.
It took a second for his eyes to focus on the moving object on the other side, to look past the grime and dust and see what Newt wanted him to see.
A loud boom sounded from all directions, startling Thomas out of his thoughts.
"This seemed to get Minho’s full attention—but again, there was that same strange look, as if Thomas was missing something very obvious.
There was no need for Mapmaking or taking notes; their only task was to get to the end and start making their way back, searching for things previously unnoticed—anything.
The shadows from the walls had lengthened considerably, already creeping up the sides of the ivy-covered stone faces on the other side.
I want you to look at her till your eyes bleed, see if somethin’ gets triggered in that shuck brain of yours.
And as the time passed, Thomas let the slightest trickle of hope enter his system—maybe they’d make it before getting attacked.
A crowd was gathered in the middle of the courtyard around the steel doors through which Thomas was startled to realize he’d arrived just yesterday.
"Hurry!"They did, forming into a tight pack behind the door as they entered, one by one.
" He giggled as he elbowed Thomas in the ribs, a high-pitched snicker that inexplicably made Thomas like him more.
"Two years we’ve tried to solve this thing, no luck.
How many times I gotta tell ya?" He paused, then let out a sigh.
But they’ve always studied them section by section, comparing one day to the next.
It looked ugly and pathetic and scared him to death—no way that’d keep the Grievers out.
"I swear she doesn’t look familiar at all," he said anyway.
All of it, together, was horrifying, and the small amount of courage Thomas had gathered began to slip away.
He wanted to scream at the monster below him: Kill me or go back to your hiding hole!Then, in a sudden burst of light and sound, the Griever came back to life, whirring and clicking.
"What’s this?" It gave him a chill—it had to have something to do with the Creators.
Minho joined Thomas as he ate, prepping him a little before his first big day of Runner training, giving him a few stats and interesting facts.
"Thomas forced out a pathetic laugh.
Alby had made it clear they could take no chances: they’d make the Homestead their fortress, and must do whatever it took to defend it.
"Thomas looked over at Chuck, who seemed as pale-faced as Newt.
Newt had paused, looking confused.
But after we were taken, we spent the next few years learning in special schools, living somewhat normal lives until they were finally able to finance and build the Maze.
The walls slammed shut behind him, the echo of its boom bouncing off the ivy-covered stone like mad laughter.
Newt pushed open the door, the slight creak once again reminding Thomas of some vague childhood memory of haunted-house movies.
It’s been two bloody years, ya know.
Minho stood, his face barely visible in the dying light.
They stood in a vast courtyard several times the size of a football field, surrounded by four enormous walls made of gray stone and covered in spots with thick ivy.
Unlike two nights ago, Teresa was allowed to stay in the building with the rest of the Gladers.
He and Newt had just joined Chuck for breakfast at a picnic table right outside the KitiDochenwhen.
"I remember remembering," she muttered, sitting down with a heavy sigh; she pulled her legs up to wrap her arms around her knees.
He turned to look at the Map Room.
"Any idiot on the planet would’ve done that.
"You mean we’re going to stay out there overnight?
cost midnight.
It almost disturbed Thomas how good that felt.
He spun around to see a Griever plop through the Griever Hole, appearing as if by magic from the dark square of black.
"Thomas was relieved they were alone.
The Griever came to life, spikes popping out of its skin; it rolled forward, ready to collide head-on with its foe.
Plus, based on the last couple of days, the Runner was home hours early.
"Oh, you’ll know good and well by the time sun sets tonight.
"Thomas looked down at his apple, then took a bite.
Minho stumbled up ahead, fell to the ground.
He moved through the markers until he got to a grave covered with a sheet of grimy plastic or glass, its edges slimed with filth.
He fought the urge to run out there, slip past the moving slabs of rock before they shut, flee the Glade.
"He’s not the Greenie anymore," Gally said, his scratchy voice so low and cruel it was almost comical.
"How do you know?" "Because people willing to send Grievers after us aren’t gonna give us an easy way out.
It’s about time someone stood up to his klunk.
When his malicious stare fell back on Thomas, he had one last thing to say.
He remembered the odd lights he’d observed through the Glade window with Newt.
He glanced constantly at the West Door, looking for any sign of Alby and Minho, Newt’s concern having rubbed off on him.
"I saw," Newt said, pulling the towel away to look at it; he grimaced and put it back.
Alby and a few others were right behind him.
It’s too much fun—you’ll see when the next Newbie …" He trailed off, a perplexed look wrinkling his eyebrows.
A couple of hours later, Thomas was lying in a soft sleeping bag next to Chuck on a bed of grass near the gardens.
So many questions splintered his mind he couldn’t keep them straight.
An hour after that, a Griever came charging through the Maze right past them, not even pausing.
Troubling thoughts all around.
No offense, Greenie, but Newt, you’re the one always harping about order.
Well, good night.
He broke one of our most important rules.
" He squinted, maybe anticipating Thomas’s question.
Crumpling his trash into a ball, he turned and looked straight at Thomas.
cohe remembered what Alby said about the moving walls.
"Someone stop them!
At first he could see only shifting shadows, but they soon turned into the shapes of bodies—people bending over the hole in the ceiling, looking down at him, pointing.
It was like looking at an image through a foot of muddy water.
"Shuck it," Thomas whispered, almost as a joke.
Why are you grilling me like this?" All Thomas wanted right then was for night to fall, so he could be alone, go to sleep.
"Wait!" Thomas shrieked, but no one heard him.
But do you remember learning to ride one?""No.
"Frypan wasn’t too happy having a whole box of his wax paper rolls taken away from him, especially with their supplies being cut off.
Again, neither of them made a sound as they fell—as if they’d disappeared instead of falling.
"Alby had folded his arms, still glaring at the Box as if trying to open the doors with his mind.
"Newbies aren’t allowed to see someone who’s been … taken.
Alby was only stuck with one of those needles, right?"Minho stood up and joined Thomas in his slow walk back toward the Glade.
"She hot?"Thomas paused, not having thought of her in that way since she’d freaked out and delivered the note and her one-liner—Everything is going to change.
"I don’t know—guess it’s always been real regular-like.
"But I don’t get why none of us remembered this stuff.
Hey, look.
Favoring his bad leg, he tiptoed toward the lone window in the room, which was covered by three hastily nailed boards.
Would Thomas spend the rest of his days feeling responsible?
As strange as it seemed, the word felt natural on his lips, like he was already morphing into a Glader.
Griever sounds.
It smacked the metal arm and pivoted the thing skyward, revolving in an arc until it slammed back into the body of the Griever.
This strange connection he felt wasn’t his alone.
""Take me to them," Thomas said, itching to have a look.
Had it never happened before?Alby looked like someone had just told him he could grow wings and fly.
Thomas had more questions.
Thomas took a closer look at the collapsed boy and realized just how bad things were.
"Newt and Minho exchanged a long look.
"Know what?" He looked at Chuck again, confused by his big smile.
I slammed my head on the table so you’d think it was someone else, I lied, burned it all.
"A quick expression of hurt flashed across Chuck’s face, making Thomas feel bad, but vanished almost as fast as it had appeared.
I told Thomas we had to split up and I started the practiced evasive maneuvers, running in the patterns.
"What do you think we’ve been doing for two years?""Trust me, you’ve never been to this spot.
I’m the only Runner in this group, and the only other one here who’s even been out in the Maze is Newt.
You don’t … want … to remember!"Gally gave Thomas a long, haunted look, his eyes full of terror; then he turned and dove onto the writhing body of the Griever.
Ignoring Newt’s questions, he stumbled to the door and yanked it open, stepped into the hall, ran.
It was like somebody had built the Maze and then set it afloat in the sky to hover there in the middle of nothing for the rest of eternity.
Tears moistened Newt’s eyes, and Thomas was sure that even within the dark chamber of memories that were locked away, out of his reach, he’d never seen someone look so sad.
Every time it stopped, the metal arms unfolded and turned this way and that, like a roving robot on an alien planet looking for signs of life.
"	For some reason, Thomas didn’t care about the Maps that much—they seemed pointless anyway.
The next morning, someone gently shook him awake.
"It’s all your fault!" Without warning he swung his left hand, forming it into a fist as it came around and crashed into Thomas’s ear.
"As they walked over, Thomas asked the one question he hadn’t posed yet.
""What is this, kiddie craft time?" Minho held up the knife and looked at it with disgust.
"I know you hate me, that you’ve always hated me.
He stood quietly until the Runners finally came out of their building, all of them looking exhausted, their faces pinched from deep thinking.
" "And probably where they come from," Thomas said as he took one last look at theiDochdden.
The ugly thing retracted just an inch, stopped moving its claw, as if shocked at his boldness.
On one side of the room—to his right—there was a row of forty or so large white pods that looked like enormous coffins.
"The walls, you shuck.
Menacing shadows clung to the boxes of weapons scattered across the table and floor, blades and sticks and other nasty-looking devices seeming to wait there, ready to take on a life of their own and kill the first person stupid enough to come close.
Teresa paused, then said something that made no sense.
Neither one of them said anything for a while, a sense of hopelessness wafting between their minds.
In the distance, more breaks in the walls led to other paths, and farther down, maybe a hundred yards or so away, the straight passage came to a dead end.
"Yeah— they got Zart and a couple others.
Another scream, this one long and nerve-grinding, tore through the air and Thomas’s heart lurched.
Refusing to put his feet down or help the progress in any way, he seemed as dead as the last time Thomas had seen him.
He’d only known what it was like to be alive here for a short while and he already wanted it to end.
"What’s going on over there?" he asked, pointing at the building.
"They’re the ones take care of all the heavy stuff for the Gardens.
The sounds gave it away.
"You’ve always had one Runner assigned to one section, right?""Right," Minho replied.
Then he turned, a look of horror on his face.
Thomas knelt down in front of it and took out the Map from the day before and held it up side by side with the one he’d just drawn.
They’d come a day apart, she seemed familiar, he had a consuming urge to become a Runner despite learning so many terrible things….
Someone tapped his shoulder and he opened his eyes to see Newt staring down at him.
Nothing made sense; his head hurt.
" Chuck stopped and pointed to someone in the crowd.
The image had already burned into Thomas’s mind before Alby jumped up, blocking the view but not the moans and screams, pushing Thomas out of the room, then slamming the door shut behind them.
"I put in all the words and one by one they appeared on the screen; then something beeped and they’d disappear.
Thomas had contemplated just jumping into the Hole right away and trying to punch in the code quickly, but he had no idea what to expect or what might be waiting for him.
But the world still seemed to be collapsing in on itself, and he knew it would all be gone from him in just a few seconds.
"An hour later, Thomas sat in front of the Keepers for the Gathering, just like he had a week or two before.
He wanted Teresa to make him feel better, say something magic to make the pain go away.
Why?""Think you’ve said enough for one meeting.
"It made Thomas sick to think people were hanging on to that hope of just one person dying; the more he thought about it, the less he believed it was true.
"You didn’t tell anyone, did you?
It’s a medicine or antidote or something, already inside a medical syringe, ready to use.
It looked like an experiment gone terribly wrong—something from a nightmare.
Now we know we can survive out there, and that we can beat the GriDocevers.
Thomas flailed his arms and legs, knocking away the horrible metallic arms as he kicked at the pulsating blubber of the Grievers’ bodies—he only wanted to be stung, not taken like Dave.
Though there had been no discernible change in the light since the sun and blue sky hadn’t appeared that morning, it still felt like a darkness spread over the Glade.
"Well," Zart began, his eyes darting around almost like he was waiting for someone else to tell him what to say.
Thomas pushed himself away from the wall and ran to the two Gladers.
Everyone knows he went nuts—some shank even accused you of killing him when you ran out there yesterday.
Why punish a guy for saving someone’s life?""So you do have an opinion—is that it?" Newt insisted, pencil in hand.
"Thomas was surprised Minho was wasting time sulking, especially with the code possibilities.
Thomas helped Newt distribute the weapons, and even more innovative ones were created in their desperation to be prepared for the Grievers.
On they ran, some of the men and women leading from ahead, some yelling encouragement from behind.
The only other items in the room were eight trunks, just like the one containing the knives in the weapons basement.
As he moved across the courtyard, the distinct smell of firewood and some kind of meat cooking made his stomach grumble.
" He nodded toward the concrete-blocked building into which the Runners had disappeared the night before.
Minho pulled several sheets from the trunk, the Maps from the last few days.
Wanna answer me that?"Thomas searched Chuck’s face for an answer, but by the looks of it he didn’t have one.
The girl’s half dead.
The twinkling red glow of the lights held an undercurrent of warning.
When everyone started talking at once, Thomas put his head in his hands to wait it out, terrified and awed at the same time.
"Maybe you weren’t looking carefully other times you threw stuff over," Thomas said.
"You’re telling me we have no chance?""None.
His face still wore the long, weary look of depression, his eyes sunken and hollow.
He wasn’t sure why, but the situation made him very uneasy.
"Whoa, wait!" Chuck cried, running to catch up.
He had black hair, and when they made eye contact, the boy shook his head and turned away, walking toward a greasy iron pole with a wooden bench next to it.
Thomas jumped as a terrible crash sounded right outside their door, accompanied by screams and the splintering of wood, like some iron-jawed monster was eating the entire stairwell.
To survive the buggin’ Maze, you gotta be smart, quick, strong.
Sounds terrible, but I bet your mom is sitting in your room right now, holding your pillow, looking out at the world that stole you from her.
Thomas swore two things to himself as he walked away for lunch break.
The subjects will eventually recall and understand the purpose of the hard things we have done and plan to do to them.
Though it was hard to make out from where he sat, there was something odd about the stone edges of the exits to the outside corridors.
Then he turned and ran, maybe to tell someone else the exciting news.
He looked ready to go.
"Thomas was slightly disappointed—he’d been expecting something more profound.
"Done asked four questions, haven’t ya?" Newt replied.
An echoing boom rumbled across the Glade as all four Doors sealed shut for the night.
Plus, we might have one thing going for us.
What if, instead, you were supposed to compare the eight sections to each other, every day?
A mom who made him take a shower every day and a dad who helped him with homework.
Then he lifted his feet and hung onto the vine; his body swung forward.
That’s a nice little part of their plan?"Thomas felt a moment of fear, worried that the Keepers might take out their anger on him for knowing so much.
I mean, the fact that you knew my memory had been wiped without asking me—and this other stuff.
He didn’t want to meet the source of those lights, those sounds.
Living in a giant maze, surrounded by hideous beasts.
Chuck and everyone else around the Glade never wanted to give him the answers to anything.
Thomas did, leaning forward until his nose touched the cool surface of the glass.
Thomas ran to the jagged, gaping hole, looked down just in time to see the Griever land and start scooting across the Glade, Gally’s body appearing and disappearing as the thing rolled.
He argued that it was one of the things he always requested, that he used it for baking.
On and on he ran, his heart ready to blow its way out of his chest.
He grabbed one of the vines and wrapped it around Alby’s right arm.
Besides the fact that the Grievers were attacking every night, the Glade had basically shut down.
"Glad we got that out of the way.
Just as the first Griever’s arm extended out to nip at them, Minho and Thomas dove in opposite directions, each toward one of the outer walls of the corridor.
Thomas looked at Teresa, saw the sickened look on her face that surely mirrored his own.
""It’s been two years," Thomas said.
A few grunts later and the girl’s lifeless body was dragged out, across the edge of the door and onto one of the stone blocks making up the ground of the Glade.
" And then he turned and headed in the direction of the building, running.
Even someone as cranky as Alby.
I guess I’m ready.
When Thomas asked why Newt and some others didn’t just go into the Maze and search for their friends, Newt’s expression had changed to outright horror—his cheeks had shrunk into his face, becoming sallow and dark.
He reached down and pulled off a shoe he’d worn since coming to the Glade and took a look inside.
What had they been doing out there?The big door finally popped open, and with a deafening squeal of metal against metal, the boys swung it wide.
The angle of vision from the window protected him for the moment, but he knew he and Chuck would be seen if whoever was in there pushed his head outside to get a better look.
Chuck was looking at him with eyebrows raised.
The tension in the air was thick; Thomas couldn’t hear anyone breathing.
"You’d wanna hold on to one beauty of a rope.
Thomas refused to make eye contact with any of them, afraid of looking guilty.
Tonight, for trying to kill you.
She pointed ahead, and Thomas saw the narrow aisle forming in the middle of the corridor, Gladers fighting wildly to push the Grievers toward the walls.
"Thomas looked up, happy to be able to offer a piece of information.
That night, Newt and Alby gathered every last Glader at the East Door about a half hour before it closed, the first traces of twilight’s dimness creeping across the sky.
He stood outside the window of the Slammer, having left Newt and Minho when they went to investigate the sabotage of the Map Room.
If you want to throw me in jail for trying to save someone’s life, then go ahead.
I’m ready.
WORLD IN CAT AST ROP HE:KILLZONE EXP ERIMENT DEP ART MENTHe read the words aloud, then looked back at Minho.
But you can’t just make the sun disappear from space.
"Glade’s cut into four sections.
"What’s going on?"The dark-haired boy looked at him; his eyes flared for a moment, his head shaking slightly.
Maybe five and a half feet tall, from what he could tell.
He looked the calmest to Thomas, the most confident, the least scared.
A thump almost jolted Thomas out of his seat as the front wheels ran over her, quickly followed by a second thump—the back wheels.
She canhandle one night in there—if anything, she’ll be safer than us.
In the exact middle of the courtyard, the still-gaping hole of the Box lay open, as if inviting him to jump back in and go home.
"Anyway, next up—figure out what we do with Tommy here.
The spikes and the arms explained the creepy clicking sounds, metal against stone.
As he flipped through them, he explained, "We compare day to day, week to week, month to month, just like I was saying.
"And what’s your bloody question?" Chuck seemed deep in thought.
Thomas missed her desperately three seconds after she was gone.
He backed into Teresa, staring as the man dragged the woman away, her legs kicking out weakly, her eyes on Thomas.
A faint memory tried to escape the locked box within his mind—shadows on the walls when he was a kid, scaring him.
He looked like he was fifteen or so, tall and skinny.
Thomas realized he’d given up on searching the walls and was just heading back toward the Glade in a depressed walk.
First our satellites were burned out, and thousands died instantly, millions within days, countless miles became wastelands.
"You look like an idiot, prancin’ around like a shuck ballerina.
Please go the other way, Thomas pleaded silently.
But by his tenth attempt, he could almost match Minho at the task.
He looked toward the East Door, almost expecting to see Ben standing there on the other side.
A group of boys milled around outside, glancing anxiously at the upper windows as if expecting a hideous beast to leap out in an explosion of glass and wood.
A tall kid with blond hair and a square jaw sniffed at him, his face devoid of expression.
Teresa shone her light down on a steeply descending, slick black chute of metal.
Newt took out a key and opened it up, then motioned for Thomas to enter.
"We can fight ’em off.
He waited for a response, but none came.
Newt finally came to a halt and crossed his arms over his chest as he looked down at them sitting on the bench.
Thomas had never seen the place look so peaceful.
"The wake-up till sunset.
"Bugger’s gone off and hid somewhere.
"Okay, we get through tonight, somehow.
It didn’t take a math genius to calculate that his speed and time combined meant he’d run roughly half a marathon by the time he returned to the Glade.
His thoughts drifted to what Minho had told him at dinner about the size and scale of the Maze.
Shelves lined the walls, and there were several blocky wooden tables; everything in sight was covered with all manner of junk that gave him the creeps.
The other chairs were all occupied except two—a stark reminder that Zart and Gally had been taken by the Grievers.
He had to admit Minho did look like he deserved a rest and a bite to eat, but he wanted to learn more.
He screamed, called for help, pounded on the walls with his fists.
"That guy’s not too high on you two shanks.
He didn’t want to get in any more trouble than he was already in—but he didn’t know how much longer he could last.
He wrapped his arms around the boy’s thighs and squeezed while Newt put a knee on one of Alby’s shoulders, then grabbed at Alby’s hands, still clasped around his own neck in a chokehold.
"Thomas almost broke his own advice—questions filled his mind.
Minho had just turned a corner up ahead and was coming straight for them.
Anything that could be done on such short notice to prepare for a Griever attack had been done: windows boarded up, furniture moved in front of doors, knives handed out as weapons …But none of that made Thomas feel safe.
All of this—the Grievers, the walls moving, the Cliff—they’re just elements of a stupid test.
Thomas refused to talk to anyone the rest of the day.
He could see that where the front door had been there now stood a jagged hole leading out into the gray night.
"Gally looked up, his eyes narrowing.
Alby looked up, eyes droopy, as if he was on the edge of slipping into a deep sleep.
He looked back up, wishing he were a thousand miles away.
"I’m gonna kill you, shuck-face!" Gally yelled, but Chuck was already off the box and running toward the open Glade.
Thomas rubbed his eyes and groaned; he wanted nothing in the world more than a half-hour nap.
Chuck looked ahead at the engaged battle.
"Can’t we climb this thing?" He looked at Minho, who didn’t say a word.
Newt and Alby scrambled out of the Box after her, then forced their way through to the girl’s lifeless body, the crowd re-forming behind to cut them off from Thomas’s view.
After the F was an L, then an O, then an A, and a T.
Then C … A … T.
"Look," Thomas said, pointing down the line of stacks they’d formed, confused, but happy that the letters were so obvious.
Despite fearing an answer, he knew he had to ask the next question.
"So what do we do with her?" the taller one asked, his voice much higher pitched than Thomas expected.
He was stunned he hadn’t made the connection sooner.
The walls aren’t even moving anymore—it’s like this has all just been some stupid game and it’s time to end.
"What’s so important?" Thomas looked at Teresa, wondering how to say it.
When he bumped into the bed, he gathered himself and looked up, ready to face his world coming to an end.
Dark wallpaper covered the walls of the foyer and hallway, half of it peeling off.
More noises joined in a few seconds later, coming from all directions, the closest right outside their own window.
There was no sign of anything, to the left, right, down, up, or ahead, for as far as he could see.
Won’t be that way for long , he thought with a queasy twist in his stomach.
"This is my guide for the night?
Newt was on him in a second, followed immediately by Chuck, Teresa, several others.
Chuck pulled himself up to lean on an elbow, looking at Thomas.
With our new decorated sky, maybe other weird things have happened out there.
As soon as his feet hit the solid stone floor, he took off, running despite the scream of exhaustion from his body.
He was consumed with shock and anger.
Thomas could see several clumsily prepared wooden crosses poking through this growth, their horizontal pieces lashed to the upright ones with a splintery twine.
A long moment passed, both of them looking toward the ground.
When it was just a foot away, Thomas tensed his muscles and swung the spear up, around, and toward the ceiling as hard as he could.
Thomas knew it was because they’d accomplished something never done before, but he was embarrassed by the attention.
Then came the crunching, grinding sound of stone against stone.
"What’s the problem?" he asked, almost shouting.
Some shanks got in there and put it out, but way too late.
Eventually, it fell on an open box full of running shoes.
"It can’t be solved," he said, his voice now quiet and distant, spooky.
Despite the fact that they’d run over a woman in cold blood.
"What did I do?" he whispered, not really meaning for anyone to hear him.
"Thomas already knew this, but hearing it made his heart sink even lower.
"Thomas sighed, then got to his feet.
Minho said it best on entering their new world: "I’ve been shucked and gone to heaven.
Tonight, they’d make their stand, once and for all.
Worst part, you’re always scared you might not make it back.
theco shack to which Newt had gone.
"Thomas rolled into a sitting position, hating that he couldn’t just lie there for another few hours.
Anyway, I wanted you to know the truth, to know there’s a chance we can do this.
"If we let shanks like you get away with that stuff," Alby said, "we never would’ve survived this long.
The enormous stone wall to the right of them seemed to defy every known law of physics as it slid along the ground, throwing sparks and dust as it moved, rock against rock.
"You shouldn’t have done that, Minho.
A gleam that made Thomas suddenly more scared of him than he’d been minutes earlier.
" Something in his voice lessened the blow, and Thomas made his decision.
He was clearly exhausted, almost in a daze.
Which made him wonder for the millionth time where they were.
See ya tonight.
"What about it?" Thomas looked at him, paused for effect.
"Too many, Thomas thought.
The dark skin of his face, which had been oddly pale just a minute earlier, had turned purple, his eyes rolled up so far in their sockets they looked like glowing white marbles.
That night dinner proved to be a somber affair, and it had nothing to do with the food.
He took a deep breath, loving the fresh whiff of dirt and growing plants.
The thick slabs of gray stone were cracked and covered in ivy, as ancient as anything Thomas could imagine.
Finally, he looked up.
Walls moving, straight lines, patterns … There had to be an answer.
This thought gave him a chill, made him wonder if a Griever might come charging toward them at any minute.
Between heaving breaths, he gasped, "I just saw … the dive move you did … back there … gave me an idea … we only have to last … a little while longer.
Thomas heard someone moving around inside.
No one made a move to stop him from doing as Gally asked, except for Chuck, who stood at the front door, shaking his head.
A half hour later, fed and packed, they stood in front of the riveted metal door of the Map Room.
Newt looked at him, his face suddenly somber.
But then Chuck’s next words made him reconsider.
co to lighten up the situation.
Something about it—I don’t think he just made it up.
We’ll tell Newt and Alby about this tonight.
Give ’em one body that’s easy to find in the morning.
Those things must weigh half a ton, dude.
He pushed and swatted at his attacker, a relentless jumble of skin and bones cavorting on top of him as he tried to gain purchase.
But he made no move toward Minho; he just stood there with his chest out, heaving ragged breaths.
"No way he’s still alive.
The beams of light from the creature shone all over the place, completely random, never settling in one spot.
"Half might’ve died, but half of us shucking lived.
No one in Thomas’s room moved a muscle; he knew each of them was probably feeling guilty about their relief—that at least it wasn’t them.
Shuck thing just looked dead—like a wax statue.
I want to say my recommendation and be done with it.
co bent in half, like a praying mantis.
No one said a word for a very long time.
"Is he going to die?" he forced himself to say, cringing at how shallow and empty it sounded.
"I’ll get you home!"Chuck turned and gave him a thumbs-up; his eyes glimmered with tears.
"Alby persisted with the questions.
""That’s not …," Alby began, then stopped with a frustrated sigh.
I tried to reach out and grasp a few, and that was one of them.
"And with that, he turned and walked away, leaving Thomas to wonder why in the world a Gathering was needed just to talk about him.
"Thomas almost laughed as Newt turned to an older boy standing nearby, whose face had turned bright red.
Not a good person to pick a fight with.
Eyes bloodshot, face wrinkled in anger, breathing heavily—to Thomas, he suddenly looked evil.
That was a little overboard, don’t ya think?"Minho squinched up his eyes and pulled his head back, as if he were baffled by Newt’s question.
What if the memories he’d had were false ones?
Thomas’s first instinct was to ignore her, to deny once again that someone had the ability to enter his mind, invade his privacy.
"Yeah, Greenie, what you want?""How many Keepers total are there?" Thomas asked, trying to act casual.
Everyone immediately ran forward, forming a packed crowd around her, a palpable excitement hovering in the air.
Newt blinked in surprise; someone coughed.
He believed it—he’d realized the massive scale when he’d been to the Cliff.
""I bet no one’s ever called him a dude before.
As he gaped, he saw, also, that everyone else had pulled themselves together into a group, taking in the new surroundings.
Newt’s head appeared at the little glassless window, looking through the bars, a smirk on his face.
For the next few hours, he and Minho scoured the ground, felt along the walls, climbed up the ivy in random spots.
Another couple of combinations made them realize that the second word was actually CATCH.
That he seemed indifferent to having his life taken away from him.
"Winston, did you see what just happened?" Frypan asked, looking incredulous.
They half carried, half dragged the almost-lifeless body a hundred feet or so to the vertical crack of the Door, where Minho propped Alby up against the wall in a semi-sitting position.
A loud crash from inside revealed that the trick had worked—and the litany of swearwords following it let them know Gally was none too happy about it.
A shiver ran up Thomas’s spine at the metallic scrape of the pole on the stone ground as Newt walked.
When they reached the final dead end and it was time to head back home, Thomas felt an almost uncontrollable urge to bag everything and stay there overnight, see what happened.
Good night, she said, just as the lights went out.
"I’m gonna break your faces!" he screamed, so loudly Thomas almost held his hands over his ears.
Just as strong were thoughts of the girl, but he pushed them aside as much as possible.
"I just did what anyone else would’ve done.
"Thomas, now slightly scared of the guy but mostly fed up with his attitude, moved to get up.
He pictured snow on trees, running down a leaf -strewn road, eating a hamburger, the moon casting a pale glow on a grassy meadow, swimming in a lake, a busy city square with hundreds of people bustling about their business.
But Newt was up before anyone, waving his arms, then shushing the room by putting a finger to his lips.
"If anybody touches this girl," Alby said, "you’re gonna spend the night sleepin’ with the Grievers in the Maze.
You got that, Newbie?" But before Thomas could answer Gally’d already turned to walk away.
"Tommy—you barely look sick.
Why wouldn’t people go out and search the maze?
" It was one word, barely there.
Maybe we’ll find an exit.
" Newt’s tone warned that the conversation about the Changing was over.
A skinny metallic rod burst out of the Griever’s moist skin, unfolding into a long appendage with three spinning blades, which moved directly toward Thomas’s face.
Newt looked completely baffled and finally broke the silence.
Couldn’t sleep last night.
Their only way out was something they’d never expected.
" Thomas shifted, looked down at his feet, then back at the girl.
Beneath it, a keyboard was set into the wall, angling out enough for someone to type on it with ease if standing.
"Are we messed up or what?"She smiled for the first time, and he almost had to look away, as if something that nice didn’t belong in such a glum and gray place, as if he had no right to look at her expression.
"No one said a word then.
"Minho was still crouched over his backpack on the ground; he glanced up at Thomas with a look of disgust.
The lights of the monster shone brightly, casting an eerie yellow glow across the stone of the open West Door, where the Griever exited into the depths of the Maze.
The roar of engines interspersed with rolling, cranking sounds like chains hoisting machinery in an old, grimy factory.
The alarm finally stopped after blaring for a full two minutes.
Trying to grasp a sense of normalcy, he made a weak attempt at a joke.
Seeing the appliances and the familiar layout made Thomas feel as if memories—real, solid memories—were right on the edge of his mind.
For some reason, hearing the word at that moment, from someone else, knocked something loose in his mind and it clicked.
His original estimate had been close—there were probably fifty to sixty of them, ranging from boys in their midteens to young adults like Alby, who seemed to be one of the oldest.
If I’m wrong, I’m wrong, and we can go back to running around the Maze like mice.
" Minho’s face reddened as he squeezed his hands together like he was choking someone.
The open sky in front of him was a deep purple, slowly fading into the bright blue of day, with tinges of orange from the sun on a distant, flat horizon.
Glum faces were everywhere throughout the Glade, and most of the workers had abandoned their daily jobs.
"I just can’t believe it," Newt said, almost whispering.
" He made a show of sticking a needle in his arm.
Once again, Thomas looked in awe at the massive moving wall—it defied any sense of physics.
"Thomas looked around, and surprisingly, astonishingly, no one seemed angry.
It seemed like it was mostly just trying to get out of there, and poor Alby was in the way.
"There was no they , just the one we thought was dead.
For the first time, Thomas realized how humid it was in the woods, the damp air already beading sweat on his forehead, the backs of his hands.
Alby kept talking, never bothering to look Thomas in the eye.
"They sat in silence until, a few minutes later, Newt walked up, looking like death on two feet.
" "Weird?" Alby looked confused.
He just about got freaking torn apart three nights ago.
The only other furniture was a crooked wooden dresser and a small table, on top of which rested a lamp providing what light they had.
He tried to picture those eyes on her now as he looked at her slumbering face, melding the two images in his mind.
"No offense, but you look like klunk.
Instead, two people walked into the room.
The bladed arm moved within two feet, ready to slice his skin to bits.
"There’s no exit.
The bed had gone to Newt.
The sun had disappeared.
"So, how long until the delivery gets here?" "Usually takes about half an hour after the alarm.
theco idea of those walls closing and trapping him inside this place they called the Glade was downright terrifying.
"So we have the Glade, surrounded by eight Sections, each one a completely self-contained square and unsolvable in the two years since we began this freaking game.
Seeing the vast, open sky in front of and below him had put him into some kind of hypnotized stupor.
Alby’s whole body jerked a couple of times, his midsection thrusting up and away from the bed.
The frightening sounds of the Grievers grew closer by the second, echoing off the stone walls of the Maze.
Must be something like our sky turning gray.
Then he filled it with smaller boxes until it looked exactly like an enclosed tic- tac-toe board, three rows of three squares, all the same size.
Minho seemed to think nothing of it, throwing it to one of the other Runners, who went and put it back in the tool shed near the Gardens.
You’re the shuckiest shuck-faced shuck there ever was.
It only made it worse to think that even if he did get answers, he wouldn’tiDocknw.
No wonder he’d looked so upset.
The distant wails of the Grievers grew closer as the night stretched on, every minute seeming to last longer than the one before it.
Thomas bore the responsibility anyway— and it was growing heavier the more he thought about it.
"Won’t hurt ya unless you’re stupid enough to touch one of them.
The image of Ben’s head popped into his mind, cocked at an unnatural angle, blood running down the shaft of the arrow until it collected, dripped, splattered on the ground….
Minho went to the Cliff with a group of Runners, taking ivy ropes and rocks to test the invisible Griever Hole one last time.
Thomas heard screams, saw blood, looked away, focused on the man who approached them.
The responses to the Variables were satisfactory and encouraging.
Too many by far .
Without hesitating, knowing the others would think he was trying to commit suicide, Thomas sprinted in their direction until he found himself in the middle of the pack of creatures.
He knew he had to pretend he didn’t have voices in his head—the others would think he was a lunatic.
How could he have done what he did out there after just a few days?
Where this sudden courage and resolve came from, he had no idea.
Thomas couldn’t help taking a peek—he saw a smear of bright red on one of the creatures’ bodies.
Other than a sprinkling of dirty looks here and there, most people seemed to be on his side.
Thomas was glad the boy had asked the question for him.
"Go find some dinner—your terrible prison sentence of one day is over.
The one thing she chose to clasp on to?
"Then why even bother coming out here?"Minho looked over at him.
"Go ahead," Newt replied.
The Gladers looked on, not a word from any of them.
he asked, picturing the words in his mind, mentally throwing them out to her in some way he could never have explained.
A surprising sense of calm eased his nerves; he let out a long sigh of relief.
"Reluctantly, Thomas let the vines fall back into place and swung his backpack over his shoulders.
It’s like you’re a stranger, but I know you’re not.
He looked up at the others.
co approaching an exit is the Cliff, and that ain’t a very good one unless you like falling to a horrible death.
"I’m … fine," he said between breaths, then looked up.
"Minho was the one to speak up now.
Thomas pulled up outside the small jail and caught his breath.
But they were still a hundred feet away.
Another hour passed.
"It’s got Dave!" someone yelled, the voice high-pitched with terror.
Each of the ones Thomas could see were very similar: a rough sketch of a square maze, filling almost the whole page.
The Gladers surged toward Thomas, forming a tight group, forcing him to move out into the open intersection where the Cliff corridor met the long alley.
As he sprinted for the Slammer on the back side of the Homestead, he watched as Gladers started moving inside, most of them with arms full of one thing or another.
Leaning back against the thick trunk, he wished for a breeze but didn’t get one.
The Grievers were getting closer, and it was now obvious that there were more than one.
co through the Changing, but everything I saw was …" He looked around quickly, like he’d just said something he shouldn’t have.
I think Minho’s farted three times in the last minute .
"Lots of sloppin’ to do?"Chuck rolled his eyes, then looked at Thomas.
He couldn’t think of one person he knew, or recall a single conversation.
Another pause, this one longer.
Minho had thrown a large chunk, a piece that had fallen from one of the cracks in the wall.
The staff put Teresa up in a separate room, shuffling her away before she could even say goodbye.
For some reason everyone looked at Thomas; he shrugged in answer—he’d only remembered so much, and now he was just as clueless as anyone else.
Like the ceiling of a massive room.
"To begin, we better go see someone.
The first hour passed, and Thomas felt boredom creep in like rats under the door.
The heavy metal door of the Map Room was slightly ajar, a wispy trail of black smoke drifting out and into the gray sky.
The growing darkness of twilight was a perfect fit for how grim things felt to Thomas.
This time he jumped from the chair and scrambled as far from the bed as possible, knocking over the lamp on the table; it landed with the crash of broken glass.
Words were etched on the glass; Thomas could barely read them:Le t this half-shank b e a warning to all:You c an’t e sc ap e through the Box Hole .
Then he released the hilt of the weapon and jumped away, running back to Chuck and Teresa.
She escaped by never taking her right hand off the walls of the maze, sliding it along as she walked.
" Thomas looked to see how Alby would respond to Minho’s sarcastic, almost cruel, remark,iDocbut.
Common sense won out—the maze held even more unknowns than his situation inside.
Even though he was nervous and scared, he told Minho he could take one of the sections himself, but the Keeper refused.
Thomas followed, frustrated that they couldn’t take time to examine the walls, explore a little.
But no one answered his call.
He looked down just in time to see the sun flash off something metallic—a toy rat—scurrying past him and toward the small forest.
But every buggin’ time, the Grievers leave the collar on our doorstep.
Thomas wondered what he’d written, but Minho answered him before he could pose the question.
He stepped back, panting, to take a look.
Chuck stood there, looking like he’d just been chased by a Griever.
Knowledge flooded his thoughts, facts and images, memories and details of the world and how it works.
He and Minho always had knives clasped firmly in both hands.
"Thomas looked back at Ben, who stared viciously at Alby, his tongue darting between his lips to wet them.
Directly in front of them, a row of twenty or so darkly tinged windows stretched across the compound horizontally, one after the other.
" Her condescending tone shocked Thomas.
He put his hands under his chin and stared at the foot of the bed, almost a shadow in the dim light.
"This made Thomas doubt the whole point of what they were doing.
But Thomas already knew.
Why do you call it the Changing?"Newt relaxed, seemed to shrink, even, and sighed.
" Thoughts of the girl crashed around his mind, made him remember the connection he felt.
It looked three or four stories high and about to fall down at any minute—a crazy assortment of logs and boards and thick twine and windows seemingly thrown together at random, the massive, ivy-strewn stone walls rising up behind it.
" Just after Thomas heard the grind and rumble of stone against stone announce the closing of the Doors for the day, Alby showed up to release him, which was a huge surprise.
The Grievers’ll kill you … one every night till it’s over….
"The Runners are out in the Maze, everyone’s working—maybe we’ll survive after all.
He stepped back, the courage he’d felt the previous evening melting away.
" He sighed.
Have you ever …" He paused, waiting for the interruption, but none came.
He pointed toward the doors of the Box.
Only the richest can be treated, no one can be cured.
His joy dribbled away, turned into a deep mourning for the twenty people who’d lost their lives.
"Every last one of ’em.
"Close the door!" Alby shouted, one final insult.
"Thomas wondered about the mention of a serum, but had too many other questions to get out first.
The idea made him nervous, and he looked around, as if someone might’ve heard his thoughts.
The Maze walls, moving.
I think we’re leaving tonight.
Reaching out, he caught hold of a branch and swung himself forward to regain his balance.
He thought of the girl and the note saying she was the last one ever.
"And why do they have the word wicked written on their backs?""Never been able to catch one.
Sparks flew from the stone as the massive right wall slid to the left, groaning thunderously as it made its journey to close off the Glade from the Maze for the night.
The brilliance of the sun should’ve awakened him—had done so easily since he’d arrived at the Glade.
""I thought the Grievers only came out at night.
If there was a code, it’s gone.
"Most of the guys who’ve gone through the Changing remember terrible things they won’t even talk about, which makes me doubt I have anything good back home.
He looked so angry, Thomas wouldn’t have been surprised if the kid came at him with a knife.
"Thomas was a little surprised.
A quick glance below revealed that the Griever had already halved the distance between them, and it was moving faster yet, no more pauses or stops.
Thomas couldn’t have been more surprised.
Instead of answering, the person gave up all pretense of stealth and started running, crashing through the forest line around the clearing of the graveyard, circling toward the spot where Thomas stood.
" Chuck looked up from his plate, where he’d been picking at the crumbs.
Minho had pulled himself up and was standing once again, but he looked terrible, even in the pale light still available—sweaty, dirty, scratched-up.
Thomas thought of long fingernails tapping against glass.
He turned to Alby then, and looked at him gravely.
Thomas looked up into the sky, felt the water beat against his face—it was warm, almost hot, had a weird thickness to it.
"They always compare each section’s Map to the one from the day before, and the day before that, and the day before that, day by day, each Runner just analyzing their own Section.
When they reached the crowd, they pulled Ben to his feet in front of Alby, their leader, where Ben hung his head, refusing to make eye contact with anyone.
" He swung off his pack and pulled out some water and an apple.
"All I want is one normal day—one day to relax.
Thomas started to say something himself, but Alby had already made it to the monsters and jumped on top of one.
She gave a just-as-unpleasant glance toward Minho, then stopped to stand right next to Thomas.
His stomach hurt, and the thought of running the rest of the day suddenly depressed him.
The answer was within his grasp—he knew he was almost there.
The eerie silence gave him the creeps, as if they’d just opened up a recently laid tomb.
"Defend your proposal and be done with it.
Strain your mind, spend your free time wanderin’ your thoughts, and think about this place.
He knew if there was anyone who would believe him, it would be Newt.
tin’co ya to survive and help us do what we’ve been sent here to do.
And he would keep it that way.
But tonight, the Gladers ate like dead men resurrected for one last meal before being sent to live with the devil.
Thomas took several steps backward, almost stumbled.
The scream ran on, shattering the air, overpowering the other sounds of war, until it faded in death.
The kid tried so hard to be everyone’s friend, but no one seemed to like him or even pay attention to him.
He couldn’t believe how quickly the light disappeared.
co as he’d done so far, but willed his mouth shut.
"Has anyone ever been caught outside the walls at night and lived through it?""Never.
The older boy had also mentioned burned earth and a disease.
With its walls that moved, every night, he finally understood why the Maze was so hard to solve.
The Maze was never meant to be solved.
The walls were closing.
"Figured that out already.
It was hard for him to notice any changes from the day before, but Minho pointed out without thinking about it where the walls had moved.
He’d be happy to slam the door closed and throw away the key himself.
Thomas ended up in the large living room on the bottom floor of the Homestead with the same people he’d slept with two nights before.
There’s no way out—there’s no way to win!
"Guess we’ll have to see what she does," Jeff said to no one in particular.
But then again, no one’s ever tried to tell us what they remembered during the Changing.
"Go ahead.
Swinging his spear wildly, he jumped on top of the creature’s bulbous body, whacking two metal arms away from him with a loud crack.
"What did it look like?
He leaned forward in his chair and took a deep breath, then looked at Newt, shaking his head in surrender.
""But how do you know me?" He felt like the walls were spinning around him.
" "What do you expect us to do?" Thomas felt a flush of anger.
Eventually, when his watch showed that evening had arrived, he went to the Homestead with everyone else.
Thomas thought about what Gally, Ben and Alby had said about him—their suspicions that he was against them somehow, was someone not to trust.
Like I said, this passage is always in the same spot, but the route here might be a little different because of the walls rearranging themselves.
He sprinted ahead, pulling Teresa behind him, Teresa pulling Chuck behind her, running at full speed, spears and knives cocked for battle, forward into the bloody, scream-filled hallway of stone.
""Sorry—if I’d known it was Gally, I never would’ve done it, I swear.
""Who are They?""Better hope you never find out," the kid answered, looking far too comfortable for the situation.
Was he different from everyone else somehow?
"You spent all bloody night out in the Maze—go take a nap.
If the sun’s really gone, won’t be long before plants and animals drop dead, too.
Thomas squeezed his eyes shut and was surprised to feel tears trickling down his cheeks.
"Newt turned and looked him in the eye.
"They should be back in a few hours.
There it was, ready for the code.
"That’s because they’ve always been killed by the Grievers by the time you found them.
From the Glade proper, the forest didn’t look that big, maybe a couple of acres.
"I don’t know if I can do this—stay in this jail all night.
Maybe whoever’s in charge realized you were nothing but a big mistake, sent someone to replace you.
But he forced himself to follow Newt’s orders and keep quiet.
The sun disappeared and the sky’s gone gray, they didn’t send us the weekly supplies—looks like things are going to end one way or another.
Chuck did the same, and they headed for the West Door, the one leading to theiDocClff.
Don’t stop moving!"And then he turned and ran, disappearing in seconds, swallowed by the Maze and darkness.
They reached another set of glass doors and went through them into a massive downpour of rain, falling from a black sky.
"What’s up with that?" the boy asked, looking to Thomas for some reason.
The walls haven’t moved, no exits, nothing.
But almost.
What’re you talking about?"Thomas grabbed the two bars outside of where she held on, moved close enough to smell her—a surprisingly pleasant scent of sweat and flowers.
He listened at his chest like Minho had done.
Next second gone.
Knives of all shapes and sizes were stacked haphazardly all the way to the top.
He dreaded going back to work with Winston the Butcher and knew he needed to eat lunch, but he didn’t want to be near anybody for as long as he could get away with it.
Billy and Jackson came forward and grabbed Teresa by both arms, started escorting her away.
"What happened?" he asked; he sounded almost angry.
Or, at the very least, Thomas hoped he could fight them off from high up, one by one, instead of being overwhelmed on the ground.
The other was short and actually had gray hair already conquering the black on the sides of his head.
He threw it on the ground behind him and kept running.
Thomas sighed in frustration and leaned back against the tree.
If we had bad shoes, we’d have feet that look like freaking Mars.
"A beetle what?""Beetle blade," the boy said, pointing to the top of the tree.
What’re we looking at?""Like you said, it’s not magic.
The crunching and groaning and snapping of the wood became the only sounds in the world to Thomas, horrifying.
He was so tired, his brain felt like someone had gone in and stapled it to his skull in a dozen places.
No wonder we have so many beetle blade spies running around this place.
Stay out there while the walls move.
Probably think I’m a slinthead shank for gettin’ you ready to work your butt off today after an episode the likes of that.
"Thomas quickly scanned the faces of the Keepers, wondering one last time if he should say it, if they would understand.
He still wanted to be a Runner—which surprised him, considering what he’d just gone through out in the Maze—but becoming the Keeper right away sounded ridiculous.
A patchy spot of blood had already seeped through the white material.
" Despite wanting answers, Thomas was ready to get away from the Slammer.
Tom, did you say something?Yeah, he said, excited he’d made contact again.
"You’re still going out there?" Chuck asked, clearly surprised as well.
From deep in the shaft came Alby’s voice shouting that they were ready, and Gally and a couple of others started pulling up on the rope.
He craned his neck to see the top of the walls far above; his mind spun with the odd sensation that he was looking down , not up.
Thomas stared in horror at the monstrous thing making its way down the long corridor of the Maze.
Thomas faced her again.
Dude, he’d been here for just a few days.
" He already sounded out of breath.
Knowing now that it was just a sick kid doing the screaming made Thomas feel better.
Soon he was fully four feet outside the Glade, jerking his body from side to side as he tried to escape his collar.
After years of searching, how did Minho and I find it this easily?Minho seemed to sense his thoughts.
The other Runners returned within the hour, and from what Thomas heard, none of them had found anything and they’d eventually given up as well.
Someone tugged on his sleeve, breaking him from his thoughts; Chuck had come back.
He squinted, willed his eyes to work in the growing darkness, wishing he had a flashlight.
" When the kid ran off to do as he was told, Newt stepped away from Alby.
" Straining, he forced himself to get to his feet.
"Get back here!"Instead of responding, Alby took off running—he headed straight for the pack of Grievers between him and the Cliff.
Fight through the middle, push the shuckin’ things toward the walls.
One had a three-fingered claw that clasped and unclasped for no apparent reason.
Deeper and deeper into the Maze they went, with only their thoughts and the sounds of their feet thumping against the hard stone floor.
Minho hadn’t explained, but he had made it sound as if climbing the walls was impossible.
Thomas wondered again about his inexplicable feeling of connection with her, though it had faded a little—but that could have been because of everything else occupying his thoughts.
Thomas couldn’t ignore the way the Keeper of the cooks kept giving him a weird look, eyes darting away whenever Thomas returned the stare.
The sounds—clashes, clangs, screams, moaning wails, roars of engines, spinning saws, snapping blades, the screech of spikes against the floor, hair-raising pleas for help—it all grew to a crescendo, became unbearable.
It was a wide lawn that he hadn’t noticed before, and quite a few of the group chose it as their bedtime spot.
After they’d run awhile—Thomas had no idea for how long or how far, but he guessed three miles—Minho slowed to a walk, then stopped altogether.
You said the pattern’s basically been repeating itself for months—one more day won’t mean a thing.
Wondering where the dog came from, Thomas asked Winston, who said Bark had just always been there.
"Everyone seemed too stunned to respond.
Once he reached a point a couple of feet above his friend, Thomas wrapped one of the vines around his own chest, around and around several times, snug against his armpits for support.
Barely hearing her, not quite understanding, he yelled out a roar and charged ahead to take advantage of the Griever’s moment of weakness.
Thomas, relieved that Newt still hadn’t erupted into accusations, grabbed the one from the desk and placed it right next to where the girl’s head lay; he sat down, leaning forward to look at her face.
’ And, uh …" Clint looked at Thomas as if he didn’t want to continue in his company.
Then, again staring straight in his eyes, said, "I was one of the first Gladers, slinthead.
"Well, for one, he has a lot more allies than I do.
He backed against the tree, trying to get away from Alby, who stayed right in his face.
A half hour passed.
The Grievers were coming, only a few feet away.
"Thomas heard the creak of an old wooden door, and then Minho was dragging a cardboard box across the floor; the scrape of it sounded like a knife on bone.
Thomas shuddered, terrified—they all looked like ghosts.
"You’re almost too late for breakfast.
He could’ve eaten a full-blown meal despite having had lunch just two hours earlier.
That weird note you had about being the last person to ever come here, your coma, the fact you can talk to me telepathically.
" Seeing the look of confusion on Minho’s face, he quickly explained what he’d done with the ropes of ivy.
He looked at Newt, then across at Thomas.
The short one was already on the ground, kneeling beside the girl, feeling for her pulse and leaning over to listen to her heartbeat.
Almost consumed by grief, he made a decision.
"This is way more important!""Maybe," Minho answered calmly, "but we can’t miss a day out there.
If Minho felt the same way, he did a good job of hiding it.
For the first time, he felt something for Chuck that made him so angry he wanted to kill somebody.
He realized immediately he’d just made a mistake—he couldn’t let this guy think he could talk to him like that.
After passing some pieces of chicken and a glass of water through the window, he took up his usual role of talking Thomas’s ear off.
Two older boys were pushing their way through the crowd—one was tall with a buzz cut, his nose the size of a fat lemon.
The jagged piece of stone fell.
"Well, it’s a good thing we saved those Maps," Minho said, completely straight-faced, almost mocking.
"He’s awake!" the boy yelled to no one in particular.
Right then Thomas made a decision.
He had someone else on his side.
He swung it backward with both hands and connected with Newt’s head, sent him sprawling across the bed as a small spray of blood sprinkled the sheets.
He said something about them killing us one a night until we were all dead—he said it at least twice.
The poor shanks who got stuck out in the Maze all night weren’t found until later—days later, sometimes, if at all.
"Newt shook his head, his face a mixture of anger and awe.
At dinner Minho had told him an old story—one of the bizarre and random things he remembered from before—about a woman trapped in a maze.
The screams of the other Gladers echoed off the tunnel walls as they slid down the oily chute.
I mean—what if we’re murderers or something?""Huh?" Chuck looked up at him as if he were a crazy person.
Alby’d flipped once and for all, Thomas thought, fighting the urge to rid his stomach of its contents.
"You can always come back and study your butt off after dinner, after we talk to Newt and Alby.
" They went through the West Door into Section Eight and made their way down several corridors, Thomas right beside Minho as he turned right and left without seeming to think about it, running all the while.
"I swear, Chuck," he whispered to no one.
cot make sure everyone knows about it so they don’t get any ideas.
And look at all the things that had happened.
"I meant does she look familiar at all?
"Newt!" he finally screamed, forcing his gaze away from Minho and Alby to face the other direction.
He didn’t believe for a second that Chuck wasn’t scared; it almost hurt to see him acting brave.
Despite his fear, Thomas couldn’t help being excited as well—maybe this was the day they’d find an exit.
Alby’s chest rose and fell with struggled breaths, but his skin was drenched in sweat; he looked like he wouldn’t last much longer.
Newt was cleaning it with a wet rag, gingerly, asking questions in a whisper too low to hear.
They sat on the ground, leaning against the soft ivy as they ate lunch, neither one of them talking much.
He was surprised at having such a morbid thought.
The few before me are already dead.
"Newt gave him a questioning look, then handed the rag to the closest Glader.
The tower of thick mist began to move toward him—or he was moving toward it, he couldn’t tell —increasing its speed at an alarming rate.
fcor his second day of training, below a bleak and colorless sky.
He’s dangerous.
Sending Teresa here and shutting everything down was only the last part, one more … final analysis.
"I want to be one of those guys that goes out there," he said aloud, not knowing if Chuck was still awake.
The Changing had been aptly named, considering what it had done to him.
Jittery and nervous, Thomas picked up one page from each pile, making sure they were all from the same day, keeping them in order.
The air felt perfect, and it made him wonder again about the weather of the place.
"Voices erupted from every direction, and it took Newt half a minute to calm everyone down.
"And then he was gone.
The second hour was spent actually working with the farm animals—feeding, cleaning, fixing a fence, scraping up klunk.
He was surprised at how readily everyone agreed that it was time to do some more in-depth exploring of the Maze and stay out there overnight.
A shadow crossed the light; then the window slid open.
"The vines—can’t we climb them?"Minho let out a frustrated sigh.
Thomas could picture it all: the creature’s metal spikes digging into the wooden sides of the Homestead, the massive creature rolling its body, climbing up toward their room, defying gravity with its strength.
Even more honest—we don’t know what we’re looking for.
After every turn, Minho cut and dropped a three -foot length of ivy.
Without a word, the driver kept his foot on the gas and the bus plowed forward, driving off into the rain-swept night.
He paused, thought of that night when Chuck had scared the crap out of Gally in the bathroom.
He crawled to the edge of the Cliff once more, stuck his head over again to get a better look now that dawn was in full force.
Anyway, it’s like being given your old life back, only to have it snatched away again.
The crunching sound rattled his bones.
If I gotta be honest, we haven’t figured out jack yet.
"Well, keep lookin’ for it.
Thomas had a strong feeling it wasn’t a way out of their nightmare; he just hoped it didn’t lead to another pack of Grievers.
The next morning, dawn had barely touched the sky before the working sounds of the Glade wakened Thomas from the deepest slumber since he’d arrived.
Newt and Winston finally let go of Minho; all three of them sullenly walked to their chairs and sat down.
"The rebuke hurt Thomas far more than it should have, considering he’d known this guy all of three minutes.
The vertical row of connecting rods, so many they seemed to reach the sky far above, slid toward their corresponding holes on the left wall, ready to seal shut until the morning.
Thomas took hold of the one attached to Alby’s left leg, and pulled.
Somehow things always led back to the girl.
"What—""Shut up and follow me!" Minho yelled, already dragging Thomas away until he was able to get his feet under him.
"Anyway … it’s kind of like that.
Slopper, Bricknick, Bagger, Track-hoe—somethin’ll stick, always does.
A man walked up to the Gladers as the others in his group spread out around them, sweeping their guns left and right as they shot at the observation windows, shattering them.
" He said it so matter-of-factly, Thomas could hardly process the meaning of the words.
’ What did you mean?"She shook her head slightly.
The south wall eventually moved, closing for the night; he leaned forward until it stopped.
"I’ve got a question about that.
The Griever rolled and clicked its way closer, zigzagging back and forth, moaning and whirring.
"Solve the buggin’ Maze and find our way home.
Though the sun and the shadows had seemed plenty to let him know roughly what time it was up to that point, being a Runner probably required more precision.
"Just be glad you ain’t goin’ with her, Thomas," Alby said; he gave both of them one last glare before leaving.
When the last one finally fell over the Cliff, I broke down and sobbed till my throat and chest hurt.
"He paused, looking at each person in the room.
She was right next to him, but his eyes stayed glued up ahead.
We’ll be forced to.
Everyone started talking at once; Thomas only caught pieces here and there.
The Griever Hole would’ve been pitch-black if not for the beam of Teresa’s flashlight cutting through the darkness.
Thomas leaned in to get a better look and saw that Minho had drawn a big box that filled almost the entire page.
Keepers, get ready.
After two years of being treated like mice, tonight we’re making a stand.
"That dead Griever I found—it ran this way, and we never saw it come back or go deeper into the Maze.
"Minho looked up, surprise transforming his face.
Two hours later, the bus stopped.
Thomas stared, overcome with curiosity—he’d yet to see a Runner up close or talk to one.
Teresa?Yeah?The Maze can’t be solved.
Alby’s eyelids fluttered briefly as he continued; he looked like he could think of a thousand things he’d rather be doing right then.
Things for him to think about as he went to sleep that night.
Three swings later he’d made his way halfway to the Maze floor.
And as if his thoughts had materialized, the smells changed—to something more like mildew and rot.
"You’ll spend the next two weeks working one day apiece for our different job Keepers—until we know what you’re best at.
"If you’re going to decipher a hidden code from a complex set of different mazes, I’m pretty sure you need a girl’s brain running the show.
Three Grievers were up ahead, rolling along as they dug their spikes into the stone, coming directly toward him.
The walls were made of wood, as was the floor, and it didn’t look like anyone had ever attempted to make the place look inviting.
"Go!" one of the rescuers—that was the only way Thomas could think of them—screamed from behind.
A mechanized surge of machinery sounded from outside, followed by the familiar rolling clicks of a Griever on the stony ground, as if someone had scattered a handful of nails.
"I mean, it should be impossible—sometimes you don’t look very hard for things you don’t believe will or can happen.
"We’ve seen it three times now.
Most of us sleep outside anyway.
And then it was time for another sleepless night.
And maybe you weren’t supposed to compare one day to the next, but look at it one day at a time?"Newt laughed.
He wrote the word GLADE in the middle, then numbered the outside squares from one to eight, starting in the upper left corner and going clockwise.
"Though I guess a Griever can’t squeeze through this window, so I’ll be happy, right?"The mention of Grievers surprised him—he didn’t remember talking about them to her yet.
Seeing all these Grievers close up hit home with an explosion of reality—could they really fight them all?A long moment passed before Alby replied.
"Thomas felt like someone had just rammed their fist in his abdomen.
The subject only made him sick and guilty, so he moved on to something else.
" Minho looked back into the Maze, which was now almost completely dark with nighttime.
Just as it did, Thomas saw a flash of movement outside the window.
A straight line of light appeared across the ceiling of the room, and Thomas watched as it expanded.
And it surprised him that so many of the others looked like lost chicks thrown from the coop.
Newt and Minho trusted her now, but the others still had their doubts.
Thomas was almost sad when the Gathering finally ended.
It’s with the supplies in the Box every week, always has been.
The air around him had a greenish, muted hue, as if only several minutes of twilight remained in the day.
By hour number two, he wanted to bang his head against the wall.
""Well, it’s kind of stupid to send me to a place where nothing makes sense and not answer my questions.
But looking at two days’ worth isn’t gonna tell you jack.
Without another word, he made for the stairs, only because they were close, only because he had no idea what to do or say.
This went on for ten minutes, until they came to the long hallway that ended at the Cliff, where beyond lay nothing but the lifeless sky.
""You—" Alby started, then suddenly grabbed his own throat, making gurgly choking sounds.
" Destiny or not, Thomas didn’t want to run into one of those things.
"  Newt looked toward the Slammer.
The fact that the Gladers hadn’t given up said more about these people than anything else.
"And believe me, you or nobody else has the slightest clue what it’s like to be out there.
Newt had three or four Gladers help us trace the Maps.
But he tried anyway.
Two more Keepers spoke, one for Frypan’s idea, one for Winston’s.
Things were bad enough—no way he’d make it worse by telling people about voices in his head.
"Thomas almost wilted.
"Tommy, I might not be the sharpest guy in the Glade, but sounds like you’re talkin’ straight out your butt to me.
Thomas watched as Alby unbuttoned the collar, then wrapped it around Ben’s neck; Ben finally looked up just as the loop of leather snapped closed with a loud pop.
Shuckin’ walls move out there at night just as much as these here doors.
Sure made me feel better—don’t feel bad about crying.
"Newt looked away for a moment, then turned back.
"We’ll fight ’em if we have to, make a path to the Cliff for you and Teresa.
That maybe they were safe for one more night.
"Go ahead, last but not least.
"Maybe he had a good point," Winston said, almost too quietly.
"Thomas was overwhelmed by a surge of anger.
"We’ve been bustin’ our butts for two years, and all you can ask is why we’re too sissy to stay out there all night?
He turned and almost screamed out loud— a beetle blade was only a few inches from him, its spindly legs poking through the ivy and somehow sticking to the stone.
Thomas sucked in two huge breaths and leaned in once again.
Thomas wiggled his arms and legs to scoot away from Teresa, then crawled a few more feet to throw up, emptying his stomach.
"That right there’s the number one supply we get," Minho announced.
Their guns—some were rifles, other pistols—looked … archaic, rustic.
Neatly stacked piles of paper and pencils lay about the table’s surface, one for each chair.
"But today you look brand-new.
"Thomas turned to look at Teresa, paled at the sadness in her blue eyes.
When we’re done,iDocIthink.
"Thomas looked over Newt’s shoulder at the big faded-red barn, pushing thoughts of the girl aside.
" Minho glanced over at one of the trunks.
She seemed way more confident that they were definitely on to something.
They grew louder, closer—the other boys had shuffled across the room and as far away from the window as possible.
If he’d seemed shocked before, now he looked completely bewildered.
The blankets someone had left for him the night before still lay there.
And he certainly agreed—he’d much rather come home safe and sound to the Glade every night than ensure another battle with the Grievers.
They mainly walked around sulking, trying to tell others how stupid they were.
Every flashlight in the compound was gathered and distributed to as many people as possible; Newt said he planned for everyone to sleep in the Homestead that night, and that they’d kill the lights, except for emergencies.
The sounds echoing off the walls were a cacophony of terror—human screams, metal clashing against metal, motors roaring, the haunted shrieks of the Grievers, saws spinning, claws clasping, boys yelling for help.
Everyone else chimed in their approval, filling Thomas with relief and a sense of pride.
He’d never forget the next look that had come over Newt’s face.
He couldn’t fight off the image that they’d been swallowed by some gigantic beast and were sliding down its long esophagus, about to land in its stomach at any second.
An hour after lunch, Minho stopped at the end of a long corridor.
"This leads from Section Eight—the middle left square—to Section One—the top left square.
As if reading his thoughts, Alby walked over and grabbed him by the shoulder.
A Glader cut it off, attacked it with two long swords, metal clacking and clanging as they fought.
"What’re we looking for?" Thomas whispered.
"Their eyes met for a long time; it looked like her mind was spinning, trying to make sense of it all.
Newt nodded, looking satisfied.
To Thomas’s surprise, the spot in which the rocks disappeared proved only to be a few feet square.
Newt was notified and he came running.
If Newt and the others hadn’t been able to solve the Maze after two years of searching, it seemed impossible there could actually be a solution.
"What do they do when they get back every night?
theco one-person-a-night thing was true now.
The sight of it immediately brought back the memory of Ben getting shot by Alby in the Deadheads.
Banished, no questions.
You still sick?"Alby’s next words came out in a wheeze, as if every one of them would take a week off his life.
You ready or not?"Thomas looked at Minho, matched his suddenly hard gaze.
Thomas found a vine halfway to the ground and grasped it, his arms almost ripping out of their sockets at the sudden stop.
"We have to go that way to get to our section.
"Hungry, Tommy?" Newt asked when they were outside.
But one after the other, they rolled down the stone hallway, clicking and moaning and ready to kill.
How much you wanna bet when we get back we find out a Griever took one of them just like last night?
Just before the normal Door-closing time, Frypan prepared one last meal to carry them through the night.
"I didn’t think it mattered anymore—if you haven’t figured out the Maps by now …"Minho looked disgusted, the pale light and fog of smoke making his face seem almost sinister.
"Thomas almost didn’t hear her—he was thinking harder than he had in a while.
He looked around at the other openings.
"I’m ready.
Trusting his instincts, he knew he’d been moving for roughly half an hour.
He wondered if it’d just be easier to turn and fight, get it over with.
Anyone tell you that?"Thomas ignored the question and moved on, determined to get as many answers as possible.
When he was finished, he grabbed something odd-shaped on one of the ends and dragged the whole thing along toward the group.
Some Gladers stomped away, but most seemed to listen and at least consider.
"I heard the door open down that way.
He stepped on someone’s hand, earning a sharp cry of pain in return, then a punch on the calf.
I don’t know, most of this is sketchy and doesn’t matter that much anyway.
he said in his mind, closing his eyes, as if that would do the trick.
It was as if someone had stolen his five senses, leaving him in a vacuum.
A horrible smell filled his nostrils, like eggs and milk gone rotten.
If you do, I’ll break your shuck neck, right after I’m done with your arms and legs.
Thomas leaned in closer to see what the fuss was all about, but when he got a clear look at the condition of the patient, his heart went cold.
He wiped the tears from his cheeks, rubbed his eyes, thinking he should be embarrassed but not feeling that way.
No one said much, the mood somber and grim.
"Bring him out!" Alby shouted, startling Thomas out of his thoughts.
Thomas was relieved to hear he wasn’t the only one.
Teresa and I were sent here just like anyone else, and we can die just as easily.
Then you’re Minho’s, and I want you to stay away from the other shanks for a while.
The latest one said it was day number 749.
There was a flash of anger there, but it quickly melted into an odd expression of surprise or confusion.
cof the coma all sorts of thoughts and memories swirled through my head like crazy, almost as if I could feel someone emptying my mind, sucking them out.
And I was the veteran—the one with all the experience and knowledge.
The only thing interesting was another one of those odd signs that read World In Catastrophe—Killzone Experiment Department.
He understood more than ever the passion the Gladers felt for finding their way out of the Maze.
Then he took another vine and put it around Alby’s left arm, then both of his legs, tying each one tightly.
Thomas squirmed away on his hands and feet, sucking in breaths of air, and got his first good look at the crazed attacker.
"Newt," Alby said in a much quieter voice; Thomas wouldn’t have heard him if he hadn’t been standing just a few feet away.
His feet ached from pressing into the stone cracks.
""So?" As Thomas looked more closely at Newt, he realized that what he’d mistaken for calm was actually disbelief—maybe even excitement.
From around the far side of the Homestead, three of the bigger boys appeared, literally dragging Ben along the ground.
"Alby turned and pushed his way through the crowd, then headed for the slanted wooden building in the corner.
That maybe instead of solving it to find a way out, it’s trying to send us a message.
" Thomas looked at her.
He looked over at Minho, huddled against the hall of the corridor.
The sounds behind him were awful, horrible—he felt guilty for not helping.
"He’s never been the same since being stung— must’ve been one bugger of a memory.
Thomas looked around and saw there were a dozen or so other graves.
Test everybody to see how fast they are?"Newt gave Thomas a disgusted look, then groaned.
Not once did he falter on his return, turning left and right and running down long corridors in reverse of the way he had come.
Heads popped up here and there, kids leaning in every direction to get a better look.
"The next few hours were frantic.
Using the same method of pushing each of Alby’s arms and legs up two or three feet at a time, Thomas slowly made his way up the stone wall.
"Thomas looked around one more time, the feel of the place completely different now that all the walls were solid with no way out.
"Burn me—you grew some right nice-sized eggs over night, now didn’t ya?"Thomas ignored him and moved on.
He’d reached the door, an ugly slab of sun- faded wood, and he pulled it open to see several stoic-faced boys standing at the foot of a crooked staircase, the steps and railings twisted and angled in all directions.
" Then his eyes slid shut.
Just after dark, Chuck brought him some dinner and a big glass of cold water.
Gally yanked the door open and stepped out into the hall, but before anyone could react, he popped his head back in the room.
Newt forced the Gladers to go on and get some of Frypan’s hard-earned dinner, but he insisted on standing watch for the missing duo.
Plus, I wouldn’t touch one if you gave me a free trip out of this place.
Just because Greenie the freaking superboy made it doesn’t mean the rest of us can.
Somehow, it seemed like a way to hide from Teresa’s intrusion into his mind.
Anyone who goes through it acts like a bloody psycho when it’s over—although usually not as bad as poor Ben.
"Well, at least tell me why you look so tired.
Chuck was pointing at a spot near the floor, right underneath the screen and keyboard.
No one dared admit they couldn’t wait to see the girl, but Thomas assumed they were all just as curious as he was.
And it was obvious from the other Gladers’ reactions that none of them had figured this out until now.
"	 For a long moment, no one said anything, and all Thomas saw were blank faces.
On all four sides of the Glade, only the right walls were moving, toward the left, closing the gap of the Doors.
" He just hoped the Gladers had turned their attention from making the aisle in the Maze to keeping the creatures away from the Cliff.
But then two forms took shape, stumbling along the alley toward the Door.
Surprisingly, despite the dead light and everything falling apart, the day in the Glade appeared to be proceeding business as usual—farming, gardening, cleaning.
"Because no one’s ever made it …"He trailed off, and Thomas knew what he was thinking.
Thomas rocked back on his heels, then ran his arm across his forehead, wiping away the sweat.
Plus, there’s still enough light to see by, as faint as it is.
He fell to his knees by one of the scraggly trees on the outskirts of the forest and threw up, retching as he coughed and spat out every last morsel of the acidic, nasty bile from his stomach.
"Ready!" Minho yelled next to Thomas, raising his barbwire-wrapped club into the air with one hand, a long silver knife in the other.
"Seeing that chick wig out made you hungry?
Thomas followed, not even bothering to look back at the dead Grievers.
Twilight had fallen, and the mammoth walls looked like enormous tombstones in a weed-infested cemetery for giants.
Exhaustion consuming him, his mind wandered to his short time in the Maze, his time as a Runner and how much he’d wanted it—ever since that first night in the Glade.
He pushed the thought away before it consumed him.
He’s the big one that stood in front last night.
"Well, we gotta bust it fast since we took time in here—you’ll just be following me around your first few days.
He pushed his way through a crowd in the foyer, tore out of the Homestead and toward the West Door, sprinting.
One by one, boys were stepping out of the crowd and walking over to the long pole; they grabbed it with both hands, gripped it as if readying for a tug -of-war match.
They’re gonna kill you, all of you— one by one!"Screaming the last word, Gally threw his body toward the window and started tearing at the wooden boards like a wild animal trying to escape a cage.
The frustration at getting no answers from anyone was starting to grind his nerves.
He heard the soft sounds of her sleep, but he knew that sleep would be impossible for him.
They’d think he’d really gone bonkers, maybe even lock him up—and for good this time.
They made it to the kitchen and grabbed a quick breakfast, taking two empty seats at the big table inside.
He’d grown used to running the Maze, but this was completely different.
He took two steps forward before stopping, as if he’d been about to charge and attack Thomas.
The sky, every last inch of it, was slate gray.
A few had bright lights attached to them.
Hours later—days for all he knew—Chuck was there, shaking him awake.
And those are the ones who got the Serum and went through the Changing.
she said, then was gone.
Just as the first sounds of boys crashing into Grievers filled the air—pierced with screams and roars of machinery and wood clacking against steel—Chuck ran past Thomas, who quickly reached out and grabbed his arm.
"You’re as smart as you look, Tommy.
Thomas stepped up, hesitantly, to the closest one and knelt down to get a look.
"A couple of boys grabbed some ropes made from ivy vines and lowered Alby and Newt into the Box so they could retrieve the girl’s body.
With a lurching squeal, the heavy metal slab swung open.
Not everyone here could be a jerk.
Minho crept ahead and peeked around the sharp edge of stone, looking toward the Cliff.
With everyone’s thoughts on the stranger waking up from her coma, it proved easy.
He held one hand carefully over the area where he’d been bitten; the other clutched his stomach as if that would prevent what Thomas now felt was an inevitable barf.
"Ain’t you lookin’ fresh?" Alby said.
She stopped several feet in front of the Gladers and slowly looked left to right, taking them all in.
""Yeah, you look so dangerous," Thomas muttered, but he turned his attention to Newt and Minho.
The odds of everyone surviving were slim.
"What am I looking for?" he asked.
The boy lay in a crumpled heap, barely moving, but Thomas was frozen by indecision, afraid to get involved.
The clicking of spikes against the hard stone.
Thomas was horrified by the whole affair—he couldn’t help feeling responsible even though he’d never done anything to provoke Ben.
Almost like toys abandoned in the woods for years, recently discovered by the next generation of kids ready to play war.
When he rounded the next corner, he skidded to a halt at the sight in front of him.
co away the ache of it all—the horrors of the battle they’d just won.
Thomas had just moved his attention to the four vast openings in the middle of the main walls of the Glade when Chuck arrived, a couple of sandwiches cradled in his arms, along with apples and two metal cups of water.
Tonight, they’d fight.
"I gotta find Newt, see if any of the Maps survived.
But he kept telling her he didn’t feel good, that he just wanted to be alone and sleep in his spot behind the forest, maybe spend some time thinking.
He walked away with Alby, hoping the Tour had officially begun.
I’ve seen the sucker’s bones.
We’d just be throwin’ more lives away.
I asked for freaking Thomas!"Newt looked up, questioned Thomas with a raising of his eyebrows.
He resolved to make Chuck tell him later, whether the guy wanted to or not.
Despite everything, he felt a shiver of excitement; he was sure they could avoid getting trapped out there at night again.
"Thomas turned away to stare into the forest where the sick boy had attacked him just the night before.
But those thoughts just led back to the hopelessness that had filled him so many times already.
Why do you ask it that way?"Minho shook his head, spat a big wad of something nasty to his left.
It was a big block of roughly cut concrete, with one tiny, barred window and a wooden door that was locked with a menacing rusty metal latch, like something out of the Dark Ages.
" He looked up toward the sky.
After a lot of deliberation, he decided to keep his mouth shut and went running with iDocMnho.
Several randomly placed mechanical arms stuck out here and there, each one with a different purpose.
Thomas tried hard to force himself to sleep, knowing it would make the time pass faster, but after two hours he’d still had no luck.
" He continued to eat, munching on the apples as he studied the huge breaks in the walls.
Finally, after the longest hour of Thomas’s life, they reached the long alley that led to the last turn before the Cliff—a short corridor to the right that branched off like the stem of the letter T.
Thomas, his heart thumping, sweat slicking his skin, had moved up right behind Minho, Teresa at his side.
Going out there at night is beggin’ for death.
The beetle blade had already revealed his exact position.
"Well," Thomas continued, "what if all the wall movements had nothing to do with a map or a maze or anything like that?
" He walked from end to end of the curved row of sitting Keepers, looking each of them in the eye as he spoke.
"He winced and shook his head, hoping now that no one was there.
I don’t care what happens, no one’s gonna touch this girl.
"Can’t the bloody Med-jacks handle that boy for ten minutes without needin’ my help?" He shook his head and lightly kicked Thomas on the foot.
Good that?" He waited for a nod of consent from Thomas—who gave it reluctantly—then pointed to the kid in the chair on the far right.
Except for one thing.
Half the Gladers think you’re God, the other half wanna throw your butt down the Box Hole.
Thomas kept a steady pace as he ran with the other Gladers along the stone pathways toward the Cliff.
Newt moved away from Thomas’s side and toward Alby—but five or six Grievers had already burst to life and attacked the boy in a blur of metal and skin.
Every lovin’ second of every lovin’ day we spend in honor of the Maze, tryin’ to solve somethin’ that’s not shown us it has a bloody solution, ya know?
"This made thoughts of Alby leave Thomas’s mind.
Thomas had never wanted so badly to punch someone.
One way or another, there was going to be a fight.
"Not much doubt anymore—somehow the Grievers can leave the Maze this way.
The absolute best-case scenario was that only one of them would die—but even that couldn’t be trusted.
"The other Keepers burst out in argument, everyone talking over everyone else.
He looked up as Thomas and Chuck approached.
She looked like she could be fifteen or sixteen years old, and her hair was tar black.
"Two Newbies in two days," he said, almost in a whisper.
Newt and Alby were gathering the Gladers, telling everyone it was time to go.
"That way if we get separated, we can be in contact and still help each other.
The hopelessness in the room made Thomas feel as if he were walking through mud-thick water.
Being holed up in here does wonders for making the brain do what it was made for.
We made it through the whole night—never been done before.
There was the Cliff, opening out into a gray-dark sky, about twenty feet away.
The others in the room were still; no one made a sound.
Thomas, his hand still gripping Teresa’s, ran with them, bunched up in the back of the group.
But all he saw was the open Glade; he didn’t have enough space to look up or down or to the side, just straight ahead.
As if things hadn’t been awkward enough already.
"I’m Thomas—been here just a couple of days.
"Why is everyone calling me Greenbean?" he asked, shaking Chuck’s hand quickly, then letting go.
It looked as if Ben had recovered only slightly since Thomas had seen him in the Homestead.
Most of them slept outside in normal times, so packing all those bodies into the Homestead made for a tight fit.
It was a strange and unsettling sight, like he was standing at the edge of the universe, and for a brief moment he was overcome by vertigo, his knees weakening before he steadied himself.
The adrenaline rushing through his body helped push away his fear—he just kept moving.
Still dazzled by the light, he staggered a bit.
Then she spoke one sentence—her voice hollow and haunted, but clear.
The woman looked over at him.
"Find our way out, Greenie," Newt said.
I want the whole story when they’re done and you’re rested up.
They were almost to the door when a hand suddenly slammed against his shoulder, gripping his shirt.
"Don’t waste your energy!"Thomas felt someone examining his arms and legs, ripping his clothes away from his body, checking for damage.
"I don’t know for sure—you’re way more familiar with the Maps than I am.
Well, no one except Newt.
At least most of us will make it through—just leaves one poor sucker to die.
" He paused and looked down at his hands, rubbing them together.
"You said they’d turn off when you punched in the code!"Both Grievers had righted themselves and extended their spikes, had started moving toward them.
theco one chasing me?"Minho looked over at him, a blank expression on his face.
That way.
They stay in the same spot, but the route there changes with the wall movements every night.
The Runner stopped three steps in, then bent over and put his hands on his knees, gasping for breath.
Like a book completely intact but missing one word in every dozen, making it a miserable and confusing read.
"Thomas’s anger lessened slightly at that, turned into pity.
Ain’t none been here longer.
Thomas peered up at the Hole through which they’d come—it looked like a square window into a deep, starless space.
"Well, no one said I couldn’t look around.
"We figured out the walls were moving right at the beginning.
"Chuck stopped stuffing his face for a second and looked at Thomas carefully.
He scrambled to his feet and walked around the tree, craning his neck for a sign of whatever he’d heard, but he saw only bare branches, gray and brown, forking out like skeleton fingers—and looking just as alive.
Thomas guessed it was about two in the morning when he turned from his back to his stomach for the millionth time that night.
Come on!"Minho didn’t wait for a response, didn’t see the look of horror Thomas had just felt widen his own eyes.
Thomas pulled up short, readying himself for a fight.
Chuck tried talking to him several times, but all Thomas could do was nod and shake his head, only half hearing, he was so tired.
If he expected the other boys to be honest, he should be honest too.
It was like a maddening itch inside his skull that wouldn’t go away.
"Well, it sounds better than running to them.
Chuck nudged Thomas with his elbow and the boys resumed their walk to the edge of the crowd, then waited in silence; any questions Thomas had were forgotten.
Two or three were missing, and not a single one approached anything close to the color white.
""If they can leave this way," Thomas added, continuing Minho’s line of reasoning, "so could we.
How many Grievers’ll come at us?" He peered down the corridor that led deeper into the Maze, as if expecting the creatures to arrive then, summoned by the sound of their name.
"Well, everyone’s speculating they can only kill one of us.
If someone’s going to die every night anyway, we might as well use it to our advantage.
She narrowed her eyes as she looked at Minho.
coWith a jolt, all thoughts of the Cliff were forgotten.
"Thomas widened his eyes in question, felt his heart pick up the pace, even though it had already been pumping hard and steady.
Several feet down the tunnel, she had aimed her light at a small square of grimy glass that shone a dull green color.
The kid folded his arms, looking very satisfied.
The first thing Thomas saw when he ran up was a group of Gladers huddled just outside the large steel door, still ajar, its outer edge blackened with soot.
He’d go down fighting.
Large cracks allowed for plenty of space to peek outside.
In some ways it’s my fault we’re here in the first place.
World In Catastrophe: Killzone Experiment Department.
The farm area, where a few workers were still picking their way through the fields, spread across the entire northeast quarter of the Glade.
The metal one with words stamped on it?" Thomas’s heart had started to race with excitement.
But nothing about this place made any sense.
"Chuck’s a shucking hero!""What about the others?" Teresa said with a nod toward the Griever Hole.
A strangling cry erupted from Ben’s throat, louder than the sounds of the closing Door.
All three of them looked at him.
"That’s not bloody half of it," he said, then pointed down into the Box.
co across the torso of both beetle blades—WICKED—ran through his thoughts again and again.
"Thomas looked at Chuck, unable to believe he was having this conversation.
Thomas looked up in horror.
Black water washed down the windows outside.
" Now answer my question, she said inside his head.
"I’m gonna count to three.
Thomas realized that only that wall was moving, heading for its neighbor to the left, ready to seal shut with its protruding rods slipping into the drilled holes across from it.
The woman pulled back enough for siDocmeone’s.
"Thomas is awake!"The booming sound of his voice made Thomas wince; he shut his eyes again.
No one in the room moved a muscle as they watched, obviously too stunned to do anything.
In other words, the sun that had shone down on these people for two years, providing heat and life to everything, was not the sun at all.
He staggered back a step, awed once again by the structure of his new home, then finally returned his attention to Alby, who had his back to the exit.
The other two groups of Grievers had closed in and stopped just a few dozen feet from the Gladers, also waiting, watching.
Two days, two Greenies, one alive, one dead.
" "Which Keeper he gonna get?" someone shouted from the back of the crowd.
Spikes popped in and out of the skin; its remaining arms swung around in mass confusion, at times impaling its own body.
" He sat back down and pulled his legs up, much like she had done.
And even now, after seeing what lived in the maze?A tap on his shoulder jarred him from his thoughts; he looked up to see Alby standing behind him, arms folded.
But they’ve always thought the movements would reveal how to escape, not spell something.
"Thomas looked at Teresa, then at Newt.
Thomas was ready.
The group was spread out across the full width of the corridor, running at a steady but quick pace —Thomas wondered how long the non- Runners would hold up.
"No way, shank.
"Newt nodded, already on the move toward a small tool shed used for the Gardens; he’d clearly been waiting for the order.
"Maybe they’ve already taken a kid back at the Glade.
But plenty of people had told him what it’s like in the Maze, especially at night.
Teresa crinkled her forehead in confusion for a second, but then a light seemed to blink on behind her eyes.
You wanna spend another night out there?
"Thomas looked at her, threw all his compressed hatred into the glare.
co flashlight to reveal her features—pale, wrinkly skin covered in horrible sores, oozing with pus.
Thomas slowed, then walked up to where the Maze opened out into open sky.
They send new ones in the Box every so often.
We’re making progress—found a couple more words already.
"Keep yapping and next break’ll be cut in half!" That must be their leader, Thomas realized.
For the second night in a row, Thomas went to bed with the haunted image of Ben’s face burned into his mind, tormenting him.
The early-morning light had a sharp sheen about it, making everything look bright and crisp—the ivy, the cracked walls, the stone blocks of the ground.
For some reason he’d expected the weird sky to throw all normal plans out the window.
"Man," Minho said, summing up Thomas’s feelings with one word.
He was still there, and in one piece, but there was no sign of movement.
Wearing a long-sleeved white shirt, blue jeans, and brown shoes, she looked—impossibly—even more striking than when he’d seen her in the coma.
He reached down and grabbed one of the vines that went all the way to the ground and wrapped his hand around it.
Real parents?"Thomas laughed, mostly to push away the sudden surge of sadness the statement caused.
They made it back before sunset, you dong.
He looked at the boy square in the face and asked, simply, "Why do you hate me so much?"The look that came over Alby’s face was indescribable—part confusion, part anger, part shock.
Newt and Alby had moved up the line of waiting Gladers to join Thomas and the others.
Dozens of yards had become dozens of feet, and the monsters were only seconds away from crashing into the waiting biDocys.
.
co "Ready," Minho said steadily.
" He looked over at Minho.
One almost got Chuck!
" Thomas looked out a window.
They didn’t see another Griever the whole way.
"Minho blew out a big puff of air and kept running, and Thomas did the only thing he knew to do.
"I didn’t see anything move that night we got stuck out there.
"Thomas said nothing, his head sunk, his eyes staring at the cracked, rocky ground.
"Have fun," Newt said before closing the door.
co every hour, not trusting anybody, refusing to do anything.
It shocked him when he realized he’d been running for almost an hour—the shadows of the walls ran long toward the east, and soon the sun would set for the night and the Doors would close.
He relented, glancing back up at Alby, then followed Minho out and away from the Maze.
Then, three corridors down, two hands suddenly reached out and yanked him into the adjoining hallway.
I, for one, am encouraged.
Well, neither Minho nor anyone else actually saw him do anything in the vines.
Thomas was almost more afraid of their surprise visitor than he was of the Grievers just outside the window.
When everyone was settled, Thomas found himself upstairs with Newt, Alby and Minho, and they were finally able to finish their discussion from earlier in the courtyard.
Now it was confirmed: the red light from its eye cast a creepy glow on six capital letters smeared across the torso, as if they had been written with blood:WICKEDThomas couldn’t imagine why that one word would be stamped on the beetle blade, unless for the purpose of announcing to the Gladers that it was evil.
The woman and other rescuers shuffled the nineteen boys and one girl through the front door and up a flight of stairs, then into a huge dormitory with a series of bunk beds lined up along one of the walls.
"The Grievers will kill you all— one every night till it’s over!"Thomas watched, speechless, as Gally staggered to his feet and walked forward, dragging his right leg with a heavy limp.
He couldn’t see anything coming, but the sounds were louder—the whirring, the groaning, the clanging.
They found nothing, and Thomas was beginning to get ready to accept the inevitable—that there was nothing to find.
"And before he could change his mind, he slipped away, heading around the corner toward the front door of the Homestead, just as the last couple of Gladers were entering, Newt shooing them in like errant chickens.
Thomas stepped forward, eager to meet him and ask questions.
Ironically, the feeling that things would be okay made him slightly uneasy.
He was surprised by how much he truly hated the guy.
I figured there was a door that swung shut or a little mini-wall that slid out of the big one.
"Thomas wondered what lay under the doors when the Box wasn’t there, but held his tongue.
"Well, those are just the ones we found.
"Is he asleep?" Thomas whispered, trying to avoid the real question that had popped in his mind:He’s not dead, is he?"I don’t know," Newt said quietly.
In that split second, he’d made a decision.
Their sky had to have been—and still was—fabricated.
Minho looked down, his eyes dejected.
"They snuck their way through the tightly strewn pack of sleeping bodies, Thomas almost tripping several times.
You haven’t done anything wrong .
Thomas screamed, but he kept running until they made it to the Cliff.
That’s just my way of saying I would’ve killed you if you’d died.
Newt finally calmed everyone down again, but Gally wasn’t finished.
By this time, Alby had gotten a good look as well, with a similar reaction.
Thomas would’ve expected shouts and questions, arguments.
That’s usually the dumbest shuck-faced thing you could ask a Runner.
Why?""Shuck it," Alby muttered, looking back down at the girl.
Thomas was to go with him—which made Thomas so relieved he was almost ashamed of himself.
"At least it won’t get completely dark—looks like we’re stuck with this twilight junk twenty-four hours a day now.
Despite the poor light, Thomas realized who it was immediately.
"Every single one of us was taken when we were really young.
He felt the gales then, sucking into the cyclone so that it blew past him from behind, ripping at his clothes and hair like they were shredded flags caught in a storm.
""The code?" Frypan repeated, his voice lighting up with a trace of hope.
Did you figure anything out?After a long pause, he almost gave up, thinking it didn’t work.
A few turns later, Thomas saw something ahead of them that didn’t register with his brain.
Next time I promise I’ll point at them and laugh, then go eat some of Frypan’s dinner.
Hours later, deep in the night, Thomas was still the only one awake.
Until he thought about what had caused it …"What’s your name?" Chuck asked from behind, running to catch up.
"Too bad it smells like an abandoned copper mine.
Across from that on the other side stood large glass doors, although the lighting made it impossible to see what was on the other side.
But until then, we’ll fight WICKED and stop the experiments and tests.
And yet they’d never found an exit.
Panic swelled inside him once again, almost too much to bear.
When wall- closing time rolled around, he started looking for signs of Grievers, was struck by an icy hesitation at every corner.
Newt took the first step, then gave Chuck a cold glare.
" If it hadn’t been for the whole Ben-in-the- graveyard incident, Thomas was sure she would’ve been all he’d thought about last night.
Thomas turned to see who’d opened the door, expecting a frightened Chuck or maybe a reconsidering Alby.
Chuck shrugged, then looked away, eyes rolling.
He’d known they couldn’t reach the top—he only hoped the Grievers couldn’t or wouldn’t look above them.
A thick silence followed the thunderous rumble of the Door closing, and a veil of darkness seemed to cover the sky, as if even the sun had been frightened away by what lurked in the Maze.
He did as well; his heart quickened when he saw that one of the doors was swinging open toward them.
He thought about what Teresa had said to him, too, the very first time—that he and she had somehow done all of this to them.
Thomas could almost convince himself he’d be completely content, happy and excited to learn his new life, aim for his goal of being a Runner.
"Don’t expect me to kiss your butt when you come sayin’ sorry," he said, then stepped into the hallway.
"Get me some water!"Alby looked over at Thomas, who was shocked to see the slightest hint of a smile flash across his face before vanishing in a scowl.
Some kind of optical illusion or hologram, hiding a doorway.
"Tommy?" "Yeah?" He stopped, but didn’t look back.
Already heard the bloody Grievers moaning out there.
Almost every person had a flashlight by their side in case of emergency.
For some reason, his thoughts turned back to the day Minho and Alby had gone to look at the dead Griever—when everything had gone to klunk.
Workers bustled about the area, looking as if they’d spent their whole lives on a farm.
Minho was standing behind him, looking distraught and dirty, and spotted Thomas first.
A few minutes passed before Thomas saw the first glimmer of light shine off the Maze walls up ahead.
Thomas was so terrified, he barely registered that everyone else in the room had fled to the hallway—all except Newt, who lay unconscious on the bed.
They tiptoed until they came upon a small, dusty window, a soft beam of light shining through onto the stone and ivy.
"Every last one of those suckers.
"Thomas looked around at the arguments breaking out across the Glade, Keepers doing their best to convince people they should take a chance and battle their way through the Griever Hole.
His mind functioned without flaw, trying to calculate his surroundings and predicament.
But based on how many of us died getting here, I wouldn’t like to be one of them right now.
"So?" Newt replied, his jaw dropping slightly.
Smiling sheepishly at Minho, who’d turned to look without slowing, Thomas got back up and caught up to him.
The Griever had grabbed him with two instruments, had started dragging him backward.
Thomas and Zart were weeding a long row of young corn when Thomas decided it was a good time to start asking questions.
The icy fear and panic Thomas had experienced so often the last few days swept over him once again in full force.
"Minho squinted slightly, as if he was studying Thomas.
His first thought was that he must’ve gotten up earlier than usual, that dawn was still an hour away.
He couldn’t have been more than sixteen years old, but he had a full beard and hair sticking out all over the rest of his body, as if each follicle were trying to escape the confines of his food-smeared clothes.
When Newt finally had everyone gathered, he called for quiet, and Thomas turned to hear what he had to say.
""Who is them, anyway?" Thomas asked, ready for more answers.
Then the clicking of its spikes against the stone suddenly turned into a deeper, hollower sound.
The sounds of his pursuer went on relentlessly, only now with the bone- shuddering addition of cracking and splitting rock joined in.
But the combined strength of the Keepers was way too much, forcing the condemned boy closer and closer to the edge of the Glade, just as the right wall was almost there.
Either way, the news stunned him.
The Runners’ll be back soon; then those big walls are going to move until the gaps are closed.
A large grove of trees filled the final corner; the closest ones looked crippled and close to dying.
Think about that while ya sit here and stare at the bloody walls.
He ran into the hallway, then leaped down the stairs three at a time.
He lay on the floor in one of the upper rooms, on top of a thick blanket, several other Gladers crammed in there with him, almost body to body.
" She looked carefully at Thomas, then Teresa.
"Teresa considered that for a moment, looking off into space.
Thomas looked at Teresa, raised his eyebrows in question.
Then a thin shadow interrupted the light, moving back and forth.
Returning to the table, Thomas found that Minho had cut twenty sheets already, making a messy pile to his right as he threw each new piece on top.
He started to speak but Minho grabbed him by the arm and forced him to walk toward the Glade.
"Who said Clint had first shot at her?" someone yelled from the crowd.
Everyone quieted, and for the first time, Thomas noted the grinds and rattles of the rising lift, reminding him of his own nightmarish trip the day before.
"Are we clear?"Quiet had swept across the group.
"Hold on!" Alby yelled, silencing everyone.
Loud creaks and groans announced a whole horde of Gladers running to the first floor.
