"Someone … help … me!" he screamed; each word ripped his throat raw.
As he did so, he pulled one of his knives from a pocket and, without missing a beat, cut a big piece of ivy off the wall.
Apparently Minho’s pronouncement had already been whispered through the ranks, because the first thing Newt said was "Well, we knew we’d have to fight.
What’s going on?""The Box, shuck-face, the Box!" was all Alby said before he set off for the middle of the Glade at a brisk pace that almost looked to Thomas like panic.
He thought he’d seen it before, back in the Glade when the beetle blade had scooted past him and into the woods.
Next, you become one of the first people ever to survive an entire night outside the Glade, and to top it all off you kill four Grievers.
Yeah, he was a little excitable and talked too much, but Thomas was glad enough to have him around.
He likediDocMnh.
"Thomas sighed.
Two nights in a row only one boy had been taken, and people had started to believe that what Gally had said was true.
The night dragged on, the heavy sense of anticipation like a weight on his chest.
He stepped forward, wanting to see the Maze for himself, as if the answers were printed on the walls out there.
The Griever’s spikes appeared again; it surged ahead and another arm popped out of its skin and shot forward, this one with huge claws, snapping to grab the spear.
The corridor didn’t end in another stone wall.
Thomas’s discouragement grew with every toss, until it turned into a heavy mass of blah.
Thomas had the sickening thought that Gally looked like someone about to commit murder.
Near that, maybe twenty feet to the south, stood a squat building made of rough concrete blocks, a menacing iron door its only entrance—there were no windows.
Newt glanced over at him, then nodded and walked over, strangely calm in the middle of the chaos.
At one point people outside rushed the bus, their clothes ratty, hair matted to their heads, strange sores like those Thomas had seen on the woman covering their terrified faces.
"Beetle blades—it’s how the Creators watch us.
You might be a shuck-faced slinthead, but you ain’t evil.
"Get your runtcheeks down those stairs, right now," Alby ordered.
He felt the slightest hint of peace, as fleeting as it was, and tried to enjoy it for however long it might last.
"The bugger should be sleepin’ for a couple of days, then wake up okay.
Thomas awoke to a weak, lifeless light.
Thomas swung to the right several more times before he dared to look back.
I don’t see any doors.
He’d just rounded a corner to the right when he slammed to a stop, his feet almost skidding out from under him.
Once he and Teresa were done helping, they went to the secret spot in the Deadheads to strategize about the station inside the Griever Hole and how they planned to punch in the code.
And none of the kids in the Glade had a clue, either—at least, they weren’t sharing if they did.
Thomas used the side of a stray slab of wood as a makeshift ruler, keeping his lines straight.
Sheer terror filled Thomas, froze him.
"Ben!"Thomas looked toward the voice, surprised to see Alby standing at the edge of the graveyard, a mere phantom in the fading light.
He wore nothing but shorts, his whiter-than-white skin stretched across his bones like a sheet wrapped tightly around a bundle of sticks.
And the walls of the corridors were similar to those that surrounded the Glade, the ground made of the same massive stone blocks as in the courtyard.
The walls of the Door were only seconds from sealing shut.
He could only imagine how truly horrific a place like this could be if everyone went lazy and stupid.
But there wasn’t a shred of self-control left in him; he couldn’t have prevented the tears, he knew that.
He tried to plant his feet at the threshold, but it only lasted for a split second; the pole sent him into the Maze with a lurch.
The edges that bordered the vast opening were smooth, except for one odd, repeating pattern on both sides.
Can’t take a chance that one day, in one spot, somewhere, an exit might appear.
Thomas’s heart rate quickened—he was now alone with a guy who’d had a bad temper before getting attacked by a Griever and going through the Changing.
Thomas wanted to look down so badly, but knew any movement might give him away.
He looked in every direction but saw only darkness; he felt along the walls again, searching for a way out.
" He paused to gather his thoughts.
So much had happened since arriving, he’d almost forgotten how familiar the Glade had felt to him that first night, sleeping next to Chuck.
Being mostly alone sounded like a great ideaiDoc.
" Newt pointed at a notepad on the nightstand.
The night had begun.
Once they were all in place—ten Keepers spaced evenly apart between Alby and Ben—the air grew still and silent.
You’ll be all whacked for a few days, but then you’ll get used to this place.
Teresa?She was gone.
In the top right corners, Section 8 was scribbled, followed by the name Hank, then the word Day, followed by a number.
A heavy grating sound revealed double sliding doors being forced open.
" Tom, we’re the last ones.
Deal?"Thomas hated the idea of waiting, not knowing how long it might be.
But certain lines in the middle—lines that happened to appear more often than any other—made a slightly darker image than the rest.
How could a maze, with walls so massive and tall, be so big that dozens of kids hadn’t been able to solve it after who knew how long trying?
The nerve-grinding squeal of the spike cutting through the ground sent a shiver up Thomas’s spine, though a second later the Griever tumbled into the abyss.
You really think we’ve never had the ingenious thought of climbing the freaking walls?"For the first time, Thomas felt anger creeping in to compete with his fear and panic.
Someone lowered a rope from above, the end of it tied into a big loop.
"No one said you couldn’t.
The latter hadn’t said a word since Thomas had entered the room; he just sat there, drooped in his chair, looking like he hadn’t slept in a week.
Thomas focused on Gally.
"Thomas?" Chuck asked, lightly tapping him on the upper arm.
"A surge of pride filled Thomas’s body, then fizzled.
Someone get help!"Nobody moved, and deep inside, Thomas knew why.
The thick leaves of the ivy served well as handholds, and Thomas was elated to find that the many cracks in the stone wall were perfect supports for his feet as he climbed.
Sooner than Thomas expected, Teresa had found him and was sitting next to him, her body pressed against his despite plenty of room on the bench.
Every last one of them might be waiting for us when we get to the Cliff —the beetle blades are out there constantly.
"Just one a night?
The Doors were closing for the night.
Thomas was so stunned he’d barely heard the last part.
"Hey, you shucks are the ones giving me all the pep talks.
First, you go out in the Maze when you’re not supposed to, at night.
Heco paused as if expecting Thomas to be impressed.
" Thomas forced a grin, though he cringed at the thought of hanging out in the Slammer by himself all day before he got to start.
To test it, he tried raising Alby only a couple of feet, limb by limb.
"The shank’s right," Newt said solemnly.
""Those main corridors right outside the Doors don’t ever change.
No one came, no one bothered him.
Alby and Newt had reached the crowd and pushed themselves to the front, standing right over the doors that led to the Box.
When we’re done, you and I’ll talk.
He forced himself to walk forward, trying to seem innocent without acting like someone who was guilty who was trying to act innocent.
"Greenie, what’re you yappin’ about?"Ever since Thomas had seen the words on the wall of the Maze—world in catastrophe, killzone experiment department—he’d been thinking about them.
Free time, meals, goin’ to sleep at night, as you walk around, train, work.
A few minutes passed, various Griever sounds penetrating the walls every ten to twenty seconds.
Thomas thought he could see bright flashes of light far away, bouncing off the night sky.
""Grievers?" Thomas was only getting more and more confused.
Tears threatened again to fill his eyes, but he refused to let them come.
"He paused, perhaps expecting Thomas to ask what he meant.
"Almost in a daze, Thomas pulled the blanket completely off and leaned forward to shake her hand.
"And you think we can fight off Grievers?
His heart skipped a beat when a boy unexpectedly appeared around a corner up ahead, entering the main passage from one of the offshoots to the right, running toward him and the Glade.
Everyone just likes to call ’em Baggers.
It was damp, and covered in shiny, grimy oil, and it stretched out in front of them for dozens of yards before it faded into darkness.
Newt was one of them, as was Minho, confirming Thomas’s guess that he was the Keeper of the Runners.
Another mechanical squeal screeched through the Maze, close now, followed by the surge of revved machinery.
"Say one more thing like that and I’ll break your neck, right here in front of everybody.
The only decorations in sight were a dusty vase on a three-legged table and a black-and -white picture of an ancient woman dressed in an old-fashioned white dress.
In doing so, she was forced to turn right at every turn, and the simple laws of physics and geometry ensured that eventually she found the exit.
A Griever charged in from the right, blades twirling.
"We were so worried about the stupid code words, we didn’t think to look around for something to push—the last word, the last piece of the puzzle.
"It sounds like someone’s dying in there.
With one last violent effort, Ben was finally able to twist his neck in the circle of leather so that his whole body turned to face the Gladers.
""Yeah, but we’re buddies, now, right?" Chuck fully laughed this time, a squeaky sort of snort.
His new life pretty much sucked.
"What were you doing, idiot!"Minho waited until he made it back through the Door, then bent over, hands on his knees, and sucked in a few breaths before answering.
Frozen, Thomas watched as one of the Griever’s long arms reached for the lifeless body.
"They shuffled their feet until they stood scrunched up together in front of the drop-off at the very middle of the corridor, facing the Grievers.
It looked as if she’d been erased from existence with one quick swipe.
He sprinted down the long corridor after Minho, turned left, then right.
I want to know who I am just as much as anyone else.
With great, sucking heaves of breath, he tried to get oxygen in his lungs, but he knew he couldn’t last much longer.
Same thing happens out in the Maze—those walls shift every night, too.
Then he remembered that no one else knew what Alby had said after Newt left the room—before the seizure.
He heard a shriek as he passed by, a throat- scorching wail that could only mean the Glader had lost the fight, met a horrific end.
They found nothing, and Thomas grew more and more discouraged.
Thomas jumped on the one holding Dave, tried to jerk the kid free, hoping the creature would retaliate.
"No, we’re just training you—someone’ll probably want a break.
They’re the ones accusing you of stuff.
You have to see this , Teresa said to him just as Newt dismissed his helpers—they clomped up the wooden stairs, a couple of them grumbling about doing all that work for nothing.
Shaking his head, he had stepped aside to read more names of the dead when another twig broke, this time straight in front of him, right behind the trees on the other side of the graveyard.
Minho was holding out a couple of pairs of tightly cut underwear, made from a shiny white material.
" Alby’s voice was louder, filled with warning.
"Everything has gone according to plan, Mr.
Newton.
Harsh sounds of chains and pulleys, like the workings of an ancient steel factory, echoed through the room, bouncing off the walls with a hollow, tinny whine.
Battles clashed on both sides of them; Thomas refused to look, refused to help.
Minho had been right.
"Newt frowned, his eyes suddenly filled with compassion.
" Minho righted himself from leaning on the wall, hit Alby on the arm, then started walking toward the Homestead with a slight limp.
Thomas rolled over, glad it was dark so no one could see the look that had settled across his face.
"You can be downright spooky, ya know?""That’s very sweet," she said.
The bread was thick and white, the carrots a sparkling, bright orange.
I don’t know anyone.
As he entered, he prepared himself for the horror that might await.
Never go out at night.
Explore the walls a little more closely?"Minho shook his head.
Glimmers of an eerie light shone through the window; it cast a wavering spectrum of colors on Newt’s body and face, as if he stood next to a lighted swimming pool.
Makes one heck of a grinding noise.
Thomas hesitated, feeling one last moment of stark terror—hearing the horrible sounds behind him, seeing the illusion in front of him—then snapped out of it.
"There were already other Runners milling about the room, drawing up their Maps when they entered.
"Most of the physical effects are caused by something else.
Every night.
As she sucked in a huge breath, her eyes snapped open and she blinked, looking around at the crowd surrounding her.
He was gone.
"Chuck, be glad I’m not holding Alby’s bow right about now.
"Okay, give me the last few days of each section—make piles along the table, in order from Section One to Section Eight.
The walls really move?""What else would I have meant?"Thomas had a hard time wrapping his mind around the possibility.
None of them wore any kind of discernible facial expression—they were all sallow and gaunt, miserably sad to look upon.
It was the one topic that Thomas thought might lead him to answers more than anything else.
The thing had retracted its spikes and arms to enter—when it landed with a squishy thump, a dozen sharp and nasty objects popped back out, looking deadlier than ever.
Almost at once the Grievers had shut down completely, their instruments sucked back through their blubbery skin, their lights turned off, their inside machines dead quiet.
Somehow Ben had already been stung once, which meant he knew better than perhaps anyone just exactly what lay in store for him.
All he could think about was the Grievers, what their purpose could be, what they did out there during the night.
Then he reached up with his hand and lightly tapped on the glass.
Even with that much on his shoulders he had to fight the rising flood of panic he felt.
And he just happens to be the first person to survive a night out in the Maze.
Her right fist shot into the air as she landed, staying rigid after she grew still, pointing toward the sky.
"But you better decide right quick who you want as your friends and enemies, hear me?
Before they could enter the trees, though, Newt stopped them.
All he wanted was to be left alone.
One of the Med- jacks was there, the shorter one—Thomas couldn’t remember his name— dropping water into the comatose girl’s mouth a few drips at a time.
Thirty minutes later, Thomas saw one do the exact same thing.
The right wall was closing fast, seeming to quicken its pace the more Thomas willed it to slow down.
He slammed into the stone ahead, losing his grip on the vine.
Those shanks’ve seen what happens at night with those bloody Doors open.
A beetle blade.
"It’s just the walls!"Thomas barely heard him, too fascinated, too shaken by the closing of the Doors.
And he told us what the Council decided about you—one day in the cell, then you’ll enter the Runner training program.
Thomas wondered what—or who—could create such frightening, disgusting creatures.
Blinking to clear it away, he suddenly caught the red lights again, flickering and skittering about deep in the darkness of the woods.
" He didn’t sound comfortable saying the last word, as if he hadn’t quite grasped the slang of the Glade.
The two of them went into the dusty little room and opened up all the boxes, grabbing a small stack of Maps from each one.
" He waited, clearly wanting to shake hands.
Then, How could anyone be evil enough to do this to us?
Thomas was too tired to put up a fight.
A lone shape was sprinting across the courtyard of the Glade toward the exit through which Gally had just been taken.
It’s just the ones a little deeper out.
It didn’t sound quite right—higher than he would’ve imagined.
"Minho switched on the light, making Thomas squint for a second until his eyes got used to it.
The red light of its eye was like a little sun, too bright to look at directly.
"Don’t die—fight it.
It’d been one endless—and strange—day.
He could remember theaters, but not what any specific one looked like.
The wonderful tastes of ham and cheese and mayonnaise filled his mouth.
The dim light hadn’t changed a bit since they’d woken up that morning, and Thomas wondered if anything would change at "sunset" either.
They’d been in the Maze for roughly twenty-four hours.
Each time, an obvious letter formed in the center of the crisscrossed mass of lines.
Chuck annoy you to death?He stood and walked over to another cross, this one almost completely overgrown with weeds, the ground firm at its base.
"He said it quietly enough that Thomas didn’t think anyone else heard, but it sounded ominous.
"Med-jacks, Thomas repeated in his head, a light going off.
He laughed, as if that one act had solved all their problems.
"Look!" someone shouted, but he’d already seen it, his breath catching in his throat.
"Two years, I’ve been here.
"A minute or two passed in silence as Thomas processed the information; they made a couple more turns.
I think someone altered our brains, put something in there so we could do this telepathy thing.
Though the sun had a few hours before hitting the noon spot up above, there was plenty of light to see by.
"We need to be in sync!" Minho yelled, almost drowned out by the earsplitting sounds of the thundering spikes rolling along the stone.
"How can this be happening!" he screamed to the walls, turning in a circle.
The right wall rumbled across the ground, spitting dirt and rocks as it moved.
But as he jiggled and swayed with the movements of the bus, felt Teresa’s head thump against his shoulder every once in a while when they hit big bumps, heard her stir and fall back to sleep, heard the murmurs of other conversations from other Gladers, his thoughts kept returning to one thing.
The head was impossible to see because of the red beam of light shining right at him, though it seemed small, vision its only purpose, perhaps.
I just wanted to see you before I went inside for the night.
If I see you again before tomorrow morning, you ain’t reachin’ another one alive.
It was a window into another grave—one that had the dusty remnants of a rotting body.
" He pulled the backpack he was holding onto his shoulders, and hoisted a thick wooden pole with barbwire wrapped around its tip.
We can’t handle one Griever on our own ground, much less fight a whole horde of them in their little hole.
The end result looked to Thomas like an army of drunk guys had done the work, but it was solid enough.
He sensed light on the other side of his eyelids, but knew it would be unbearable to open them.
"Now everyone keep their bloody mouths shut, I mean it.
A normal maze’d be hard enough—but when it changes every night, couple of mental mistakes and you’re spendin’ the night with vicious beasts.
""I … It’s all very confusing right now.
He pictured them in his mind as he picked at his eggs and bacon with a fork, speaking to no one, not even Chuck, who ate silently next to him.
He climbed until he was right below the body, wrapped a vine around his own chest for support, then pushed Alby up as far as he could, limb by limb, and tied them off with ivy.
Did the Grievers come last night?"Newt paused, darkness passing over his face.
As for Thomas and the rest of those committed to the escape, there was a ton of work to be done.
They always come out at night.
I’m almost done, she replied.
"We need your help in the Griever Hole, in case one of those things is in there waiting for us.
"Thomas barely heard Newt, having seen Alby sulking over to the side, away from the main group of the Gladers, alone.
Even the flashlights seemed to get swallowed by the darkness.
Thomas ignored him, more interested than ever in the outside of the Glade.
Ignoring the gaping stares of everyone at the bottom—especially Gally—he walked out the door, pulling Chuck by the arm as he did so.
But deep down, he held on to the hope that he could fight long enough for someone to punch in the code and shut down the Grievers before they killed him.
In front of him, through the East Door, he could make out passages leading to the left, to the right, and straight ahead.
Earlier, Minho and a couple of Runners had pulled out ropes of ivy and knotted them to vines still attached to the walls.
And he didn’t even know if it had anything to do with Alby—he’d never much liked the guy.
Asking them to fight the Grievers was asking a lot.
He caught glimpses of ropes and chains and other odds and ends as Minho’s flashlight crisscrossed the closet.
The Creators knew the plan—they might reprogram the Grievers.
He heard the twisted animal-machines come closer, so close, waiting on the stone blocks below.
He’d been so quiet, his voice sounded odd, especially with the hollow echo the Maze walls created.
"Newt found you last night and told everyone to let you sleep.
Then, in unison, the monsters moved forward, slowly, instrument-tipped appendages unfolding, pointed at Thomas and the Gladers, ready to kill.
More than anything, he just wanted Ben gone, wanted it all to be over.
Before twilight faded to blackness, he was already in his new favorite spot in the forest corner, curled up against the ivy, wondering if he could ever run again.
The Keeper sighed.
Before long eighteen boys had joined Thomas and his friends in the tunnel, making a total of twenty-one Gladers in all.
"Are you serious?" He paused, searching for words.
" Chuck paused to take a breath, then kept going.
That’s one of the reasons we run this place all nice and busylike.
He knew it was dangerous, but the idea of actually fighting the Grievers—not just running from them—was terrifying.
Newt and Alby, who finally felt well enough to walk around again, his head heavily bandaged, insisted on a plan for everyone to rotate where they slept each night.
And whatever it was, to Thomas it meant one thing: the fact they could no longer see the sun probably meant they’d never been able to in the first place.
"Thomas was quiet as he and Minho got their things ready and ate a lightning-fast breakfast.
They made good time—Thomas was glad for his wristwatch, with the skies being gray—because it quickly became obvious that the walls hadn’t moved from the day before.
"Thomas stopped drinking, sucked in a big satisfied breath, then burped.
And I think it might be part of the Variables.
Escorted into the Homestead by a couple of Med-jacks, up the stairs, a glimpse through a barely ajar door of someone feeding the comatose girl in her bed—he felt an incredibly strong urge to go see her, to check on her—into their own rooms, into bed, food, water, bandages.
For some reason, he was different from everyone else in the Glade.
But the reality of the situation sank like a stone in his belly.
Thomas was confused, but pressed on.
The only movement was Ben’s right pinky finger, twitching.
Now only a few feet away, the visitor grew louder and louder until Thomas caught a shadowed glimpse of a skinny boy limping along in a strange, lilting run.
He pushed the thought aside as he entered the room.
Then there were the walls closing and dinner.
"There is, of course, one final Variable.
What’s that supposed to mean?"Before Thomas could answer, the faint memory of last night, before he fell asleep, came to him, Teresa’s words inside his mind.
First couple of times, he had to sprint to catch up after cuttingiDocthe.
Thomas held his breath, not daring to make the slightest sound.
But even with the ever-increasing light, he still couldn’t tell what was down there.
After his last bite, Thomas sat back in his chair.
The creature was a horrific mix of animal and machine, and seemed to realize it was being observed, seemed to know what lay inside the walls of the Glade, seemed to want to get inside and feast on human flesh.
Why not their last names?"Nice to meet you, Thomas," Chuck said.
"Now who’s the one giving up?"Minho’s head snapped up so quickly, Thomas took a step backward.
"Well … he has been through the Changing—Griever stung him in the middle of the day just outside the West Door.
Chuck was in charge of filling water bottles and getting them out to everyone.
""What do you think it means?" Intensely interested, he tried to block out the shouts and chatter rumbling through the Glade as others found out about the Map Room being burned.
It knows I’m done, he thought.
A metallic clicking sound from the branches above grabbed his attention, made him look up; a flash of silver and red light caught his eyes just before disappearing around the trunk to the other side.
She paused.
Thomas conveniently finds himself in the Maze for the night, then tries to convince everyone he’s a hero.
One by one he heard the Gladers’ dwindling shouts and hoots up ahead.
Dread filled him again.
"They’re probably coming right—"A loud, slow beeping sound cut him off, like the warning alarm of a huge truck driving in reverse, but much more powerful.
The meeting was dismissed and everyone except Newt and Minho left the room in a hurry.
"You mean … you remember me?" he asked, embarrassed at the squeak that escaped on the last word.
Enough to know that sometimes knowing sucked.
He’d just defeated a Griever, one of the monsters that had terrorized the Gladers for more than two years.
The sense of relief that flooded through Thomas surprised him—he wasn’t completely alone in this place.
Wondered when the fight would begin.
He had to fight the bile that surged up his throat.
"I’ve heard that a couple of times now.
Actually, a lot of Gladers have more than one job.
For some reason the girl had popped into his head again, out of the blue, and then thoughts of Ben, and the dead Griever, which should have been a good thing but everyone acted as if it were anything but.
"Man," Alby said, then ran his hands over his short hair as he let out a long sigh.
But if you wanna haul it right now, we could probably make it there and back before the walls shut.
They didn’t close tonight.
They’d been here two years?
"You know about the ones from the Glade, but there are four more out in the Maze that lead to Sections One, Three, Five, and Seven.
"Stop right now, or you ain’t gonna see tomorrow.
" He reached down and rubbed his right ankle absently, a brief look of pain flashing across his face.
"I’m done with you.
Thomas reached in and pulled apart the curtains of ivy, then stared blankly at a square of metal riveted to the stone with words stamped across it in big capital letters.
A loud clank rang out above him and he sucked in a startled breath as he looked up.
"Thomas waited, hoping that Newt or Alby would have a positive reaction to the news, maybe even have further information to shed light on the mystery.
Everyone crowded together against the wall farthest from the windows, doing their best to keep quiet.
Suddenly, the Glade, the walls, the Maze—it all seemed … familiar.
Thomas lost sight of the body as he struggled with Newt, thankful for the distraction.
" He paused, as if expecting a laugh, but none came.
" He paused,taking in a really deep breath and letting it go in a rush of air.
He watched, curious, as they met at the big iron door of the small building; one of the boys turned the rusty wheel handle, grunting with the effort.
"As you all know, the last few days have been bloody crazy, and quite a bit seems centered around our Greenbean, Tommy, seated before us.
"Thomas could tell the boy was being less than honest but decided not to press him.
"I wasn’t here, but I heard the kid who volunteered to do it had only gone down about ten feet when something swooshed through the air and cut him clean in half.
None of us knew jack on First Day, you neither.
"That’s right.
Alby didn’t respond to Ben; he pulled on the collar to make sure it was both firmly snapped and solidly attached to the long pole.
"                            She paused again, pulled a string of hair behind her ear.
" Thomas paused, calming down as much as he could, making sure his voice didn’t crack.
Especially after last night.
"Shouldn’t someone give a pep talk or something?" Minho asked, pulling Thomas’s attention away from Alby.
That night, Thomas lay staring at the sparkling sky, wondering if he’d ever sleep again.
They started at the Box, which was closed at the moment—double doors of metal lying flat on the ground, covered in white paint, faded and cracked.
Be thankful for these walls.
"You broke our bloody Number One Rule, so you get one day in the Slammer.
Testing our ability to hope and fight.
An enormous pit lurked in the middle of it, though.
" Thomas didn’t want to think about all the bad things that might happen.
They had three possible choices, but Minho went to the right without hesitating.
He grinned at Alby, then headed straight for the kitchen and food.
Minho’s head popped up; he looked down one of the darkened stone corridors.
Who did I eat it with?"Tommy, are you even listening to me?"Thomas snapped out of his daze and focused on Newt, who’d been talking for who knew how long; Thomas hadn’t heard a word of it.
"A couple of miles from here, out near the Cliff.
Every one of you loved seeing that slinthead get his dues, and you know it.
Why do you think the Grievers are only taking one shank at a time?"Thomas’s stomach turned sour—he knew the exact answer to that question, and some others now.
"She paused.
"Thomas felt like he’d been caught stealing, but he was genuinely concerned—Newt was one of the few people in the Glade he actually liked.
"For the first time, Thomas thought Chuck’s personality had gone from mildly irritating to intolerable.
Thomas felt tears swell under his eyelids; one escaped and trickled down his right temple, intohis hair.
If it weren’t for the little fact they were torn apart from friends and families and trapped in a Maze with a bunch of monsters, it could be paradiDocse.
.
co Some things here were too perfect.
Thomas clamped his hands to his ears, looking around as the siren blared, his heart about to thump its way out of his chest.
Down and down it went, not leaving his sight until it grew too small to see.
The sky overhead was cloudless and blue, but Thomas could see no sign of the sun despite the brightness of the day.
Thomas, when he should’ve been wettin’ his pants, took control, defied all laws of physics and gravity to get Alby up onto that wall, diverted the Grievers away from him, beat one off, found—""We get the point," Gally snapped.
co until he’d be done with the Gardens.
She’s just a pawn—they sent her here as our last tool or hint or whatever to help us get out.
All this added up to making us think there had to be a solution, just encouraging us to work all the harder while at the same time magnifying our discouragement at not finding one.
Thomas had no memory of his life before the Box, but he was positive he’d finished the worst twenty-four hours of his existence.
Before his pendulum swing took him back toward Alby, he reached out for another vine, catching a nice thick one.
"Thomas looked at each of the three sets of Grievers—not one had yet made a move toward the Gladers—and nodded.
He knew he should hold some suspicion, having no reason to trust anyone yet, but the curiosity won out.
He held Gally down with his left hand, pushing down on the boy’s neck, as his right fist rained punches upon Gally’s face, one after another.
Tears glistened in his eyes; dribbles of snot oozed from his nostrils.
" But the tremor in his voice gave him away—he was just trying to say the right thing.
"How could we have ever missed that?
"Minho faked an evil grin.
The only reason the Grievers are doing it one by one is so we don’t all die before it ends the way it’s supposed to.
He wanted to cry, but no tears came; he could only sit there, alone, waiting.
He then laid them one on top of the other so that each drawing of the Maze matched the same day above it and below it, until he was looking at eight different sections of the Maze at once.
And why are Grievers called Grievers?"Minho explained as they continued through the endless turns of the Maze, neither one of them leading now.
Taking heart at the slight falter, Thomas started screaming as he charged.
When he could hear only the sounds of distant Glader conversations, as well as faint echoes of bleating sheep and snorting pigs, his wish was granted; he found the junction of the two giant walls and collapsed into the corner to rest.
High and shrill, the barely human shriek echoed across the stone courtyard; every kid in sight turned to look toward the source.
And it was an odd sight on the other side: Ben, trembling, crying, a roughly cut collar of old leather wrapped around his pale, scrawny neck, attached to a long pole that stretched from him to Alby, twenty feet away.
Thomas hesitated, then stepped into it with his right foot and clutched the rope as he was yanked toward the sky.
Thomas held his hands up again, wishing he could just zap his thoughts into everyone else’s brains.
Spend one day with them suckers— that’ll cure any thoughts of goin’ that direction, I can tell ya that.
"Well, the walls move every day, right?""Yeah.
"He’d been dreading it, but Thomas knew it was time to tell them the last part of his plan.
Wooden poles were carved into spears or wrapped in barbwire; the knives were sharpened and fastened with twine to the ends of sturdy branches hacked from trees in the woods; chunks of broken glass were duct-taped to shovels.
Its arms shifted about like the legs of the beetle blade, some with sharp picks that drove into the stone of the wall for support.
"Thomas scowled, wishing he could find one little spark of hope.
They ran down a long corridor to the right, passing several turns to the left.
Drop your sissy side and start using that shuck brain if you got one.
He was sure he’d never seen her before—but then the slightest hint of doubt crept into his mind.
Thomas waited for an answer as Minho and Newt exchanged a long glance.
Eventually, the day dragged to a close, and the setting of the sun brought the now-familiar grinding of the four Doors closing for the night.
But when he focused back on Alby, he stopped.
Thomas watched one of them look down to write something, another reach up and put on a pair of glasses.
"Name’s Newt, Greenie, and we’d all be right cheery if ya’d forgive our klunk-for-brains new leader, here.
Pounding the stone with his feet, he fled as fast as he possibly could.
Alby stopped walking, and Thomas was surprised to see they’d reached the South Door; the two walls bracketing the exit towered above them.
A fear he had never known filled him to the point of insanity.
"Hey—you okay?" The Runner’s head rested on outstretched arms as he panted, his chest heaving.
"What if Ben had gotten down here right before he went nuts and attacked me?"Minho pulled the keys out of his pocket and dangled them with a clickety-clank.
"Thomas paused before he replied, not wanting to be cut off again.
Minho must’ve finally fried his last bit of brain cells—not to mention Gally.
"Thomas nodded, absently kicking a loose rock across the dusty, cracked stone floor of the Glade.
Then his face grew serious, his eyebrows slanting inward.
Throwing his arms out, Thomas flailed, reaching and grabbing to stop his plunge to the hard stone below.
His legs kicked out and he rolled onto his side, thrashing back and forth as if someone else were trying to strangle him.
First the delusions start, then animal instincts begin to overpower the human ones.
He put his hands up to his ears, squeezed his eyes shut.
Alby looked up, his eyes wet with tears.
Killzone.
He saw only a flash of pale skin and enormous eyes—the haunted image of an apparition—and cried out, tried to run, but it was too late.
And the faint light emanating from their pursuers made the oddity up ahead all the more apparent.
"Alby walked up a moment later with a big plastic cup full of water and handed it to Minho, who gulped down the whole thing without stopping once for breath.
The two ivy-covered walls on either side of him seemed to intersect with nothing but sky up ahead.
"Somehow I have to get through that!" He nodded toward the rolling pack of Grievers between them and the Cliff—they looked like one big mass of rumbling, spiked blubber, glistening with flashes of lights off steel.
" Thomas said it in a matter-of- fact tone, as a resigned repeat of what Minho had said a moment earlier.
He wanted to know more about her, understand the odd connection he felt to her.
" Minho sighed as if bored, then muttered, almost to himself, "Why do you shanks always come in here asking stupid questions?
It looked fresh and bore the name Stephen—the n extra small and right at the edge because the carver hadn’t estimated well how much room he’d need.
Two years, nothing different, now this.
"I just … feel like I need to save everyone.
" He paused, turning in a slow circle as if he wanted every person to see his face.
Minho paused a few seconds, thinking before he spoke.
"You’ll have to make it through the night in there.
"If I can convince those shanks—and that’s a big if—the best time to go would be at nightiDoc.
"Put her next to Ben’s room, and keep a watch on her day and night.
I know her, she knows me—or at least, we used to.
All we usually take with us is a couple of sharp knives.
"Everyone put some thought into it—maybe when we get right nice and bored we can have another Gathering to talk about it.
Alby pointed down at the doors.
"Shuck it, boy, what you lookin’ at?"Thomas shook his head slightly, feeling like he’d been in a trance.
"It’s when the Keepers meet—they only call one when something weird or terrible happens.
Soon after eating, no one argued when they were told it was time for bed.
" He was annoying but helpful, and fifteen minutes after entering the room, Thomas examined his finished product.
Thomas let go of the rope he’d used around his chest and heaved his body to the left, scraping along the wall.
I pretty much hated you the last couple days.
Thomas focused back in on the dozens of strangers around him.
When they were finished, Thomas headed back to the secluded place where he’d slept the night before, in the corner behind the Deadheads.
"I’m probably twelve years old, dude.
"Newt looked down in the Box one more time, then faced the crowd, gravely.
"So …," he asked cautiously, "did you find anything today?"Minho’s eyes opened wide; he focused on Thomas.
Thomas was happy with the conversation—it had gone about as well as he could’ve possibly hoped.
The tone of his voice only heightened Thomas’s concern.
" Thomas paused, surprised at himself.
""I’m not stupid!" Teresa shouted, her voice muffled by the walls.
But Thomas refused to look back, knowing every second counted.
He was holding several aluminum poles, connecting the ends to make a shaft maybe twenty feet long.
No one said a word, as if all speculation on the new sky had been exhausted.
They put us in the Box and sent us up here—a big group to start and then one a month over the last two years.
One a night.
There was only one answer to hold on to.
"That was one of them beetle blades," someone said.
Chuck screamed as he flew through the air, and he almost missed the target, but his feet went through; then his stomach and arms slammed against the sides of the invisible hole before he disappeared inside.
"Someone cheered, and then someone else.
But you’ve seen what happens at night.
"The tension was palpable; Thomas felt like the air in the room had become glass that could shatter at any second.
Thomas had gotten so used to looks of despair, it was almost unsettling to see happy faces.
And with no more lights, Thomas couldn’t see a single thing.
Could the Maze really be so massively huge that even after two years they still hadn’t found a way out?
A red light to his left, on the wall, caught his attention.
" Alby sighed, clearly done with the conversation.
As if in answer to her question, someone fell through the black square—it was Minho, looking as if he’d been scratched or stabbed on ninety percent of his body.
29coThomas didn’t stop until the voice had gone for good.
" Thomas was relieved someone was finally getting it.
Everyone needs a buddy in this place.
"Why don’t you just tell us what the klunk we’re doing this for?""I’m done explaining," Thomas said, knowing they just had to see what he was picturing in his mind.
"Are you gonna pitch in?"Alby looked up, surprise crossing his face as if he hadn’t known that anyone else was in the room.
Thomas ran right behind Minho for two more hours, sprinkled with little breaks that seemed to get shorter every time.
" Thomas knew he was right about the Hole, the code, the door, the need to fight.
Either way, if he’d had any doubt about what he’d told Chuck the night before, it had now completely vanished.
The terrible sounds he’d heard escalate for the last hour took on a high-pitched, mechanical squeal, like a robotic death yell.
But down the road a piece, you’ll be fightin’ true and good.
Teresa stood to his right, leaning against the massive stone wall.
"I don’t care what this shank hears.
Bright yellow paint, red blankets, green curtains.
Be honest if anything—anything at all—seems familiar.
"Reason we’re here is because almost every lovin’ kid in the Glade has come up to me in the last day or two either boohooing about Thomas or beggin’ to take his bloody hand in marriage.
The lights of the chamber flashed off the silvery surface—a wicked-looking dagger, gripped tightly in his fingers.
"Thomas sighed; it was such a long story, and he didn’t feel like telling the whole thing.
""Dude, it smells like feet down there!""Hope you enjoyed the one-way trip, Greenie.
He felt an uncomfortable sense of vertigo looking at the towering walls, as if he hovered above them instead of sitting at their base.
"We should do it tonight, before anyone else is killed.
He grew uneasy and realized he’d slowed his pace, not so eager to reach the walls anymore.
Thomas had almost expected the skeletal remnant of a person—someone on the verge of death.
Thomas was just passing the Box when he was surprised to see someone enter the Glade from the Maze, through the West Door, to his left—an Asian kid with strong arms and short black hair, who looked a little older than Thomas.
It’d been easy to talk about—the nothing -to-lose fight, the hope that just one of them would be taken, the chance to finally escape.
"We can’t go back!" he finally yelled, turning to look at everyone in the room.
If Teresa was right, and they’d been that close to figuring out some kind of clue to get out of there, only to see it literally lost in flames … It was so upsetting it hurt.
" Thomas ate his last bite, took a big drink of water.
Thomas blinked, momentarily surprised by the voice since she hadn’t done it in a while.
"All right, everybody trace the last ten or so days onto a piece of this stuff.
Newt’s eyes narrowed as he looked out toward one of the entrances to the Maze.
When the Griever rolled, it made the metallic whirring sound, like the spinning blade of a saw.
Thomas thought about that—actually, he was sort of getting used to it.
Number one priority is to protect Thomas and Teresa.
""Sorry—I’m just glad you’re alive.
"Shuck things can climb the bloody walls, remember?
"Newt’s grin had no humor in it.
Alby wasn’t acting scared—he appeared … confused.
"Whoa!" Chuck yelled, the slightest hint of his old self breaking through.
He was conscious, but Thomas had never seen someone so exhausted.
" There were a few scattered laughs, and then everyone gathered behind Alby and Newt, packing in even tighter, waiting to hear what they said.
He could only sit and hope that things might be better now than they’d been in the Maze.
And if God himself came down right now and told me I could go back home …" Alby looked to the ground and shook his head again.
The Glade had gone back to business as usual—people working the jobs, the doors of the Box closed, sun shining down.
So when Thomas saw me give up, he shouldn’t have questioned it.
Honestly, I’m amazed that in the end, despite everything, we were able to collect such a large population of kids that just never gave up.
"I’ll go last," Thomas said.
44	Thomas and Minho didn’t stop until they were halfway to the last dead end of Section Eight.
Does everyone go psycho like Ben and start trying to kill people?""Ben was way worse than most.
What matters most is getting Thomas and Teresa to the Griever Hole!"Thomas looked away from him, back at the approaching monsters—they were only a few feet away.
Despite the number of people and the chaos of such a change, a disturbing silence hung over the activities, as if no one wanted to draw attention to themselves.
Winston was the only one to say no.
Thomas closed his eyes and rested his head against the wall.
Once they left the lawn area and stepped onto the hard gray stone of the courtyard floor, Newt broke into a run, heading for the western wall.
But no one quit.
They tested thousands, chose you for the big one.
Thomas threw another one, another foot out.
He looked up, his eyes wet with tears.
"Thomas quickly gathered his thoughts, grasping for the right words inside the swirling cloud of frustration, confusion and anger in his mind.
Plus, he might not want you to hear it anyway.
He didn’t love it, and mostly ignored the other boys working alongside him, but he didn’t hate it nearly as much as what he’d done for Winston at the Blood House.
They both connected, sending the last monster plummeting to its death.
His body shot down a steep decline, slick with an oily goo that smelled awful—like burnt plastic and overused machinery.
"No one ever understood!" the boy screamed over the horrible noise of the creature, crunching its way deeper into the Homestead, ripping the wall to pieces.
As he watched, it plopped down on top of its dead brother and another Griever started entering the Hole.
You’re fine now?"Alby flexed his right bicep.
"Wee little fat shank, but nice sap when all’s said and done.
Thomas grew perfectly still, squinting, trying to make out what was on the other side.
He tested each one, and they all proved to be as strong as the first.
One boy’s eyes, flared with hatred, stopped him cold.
Massive stone walls, hundreds of feet high, moving like sliding glass doors—an image from his past life that flashed through his thoughts.
Thomas tightened the straps on his backpack, held his makeshift fighting spear tightly in his right fist.
"Hope you’re right," Chuck said with a shaky voice.
An itch to learn the code, embarrassment at what Newt thought of him and Teresa, the intrigue of what they might find out in the Maze—and fear.
He was already completely confused—being blamed for things only made him feel worse.
I was gonna tell you—someone said they saw him run out into the Maze after heiDocleft.
He caught a gleam of red light sweeping the ground in front of the creature as if it came from its eyes.
" Alby looked just as confused as Thomas felt.
Not until something about these patterns gives a clue that an exit might open up, even temporarily.
Several boys milled about the Glade that night, but for the most part it was quiet, like everyone just wanted to go to sleep, end the day and be done with it.
Something might’ve changed, something might’ve opened up.
The Runners had just returned and entered the mysterious Map Room, clanging the iron door shut; Minho had already gone in earlier.
Sun flares are normal, but these were unprecedented, massive, spiking higher and higher—and once they were noticed, it was only minutes before their heat slammed into Earth.
"The woman broke her gaze into nothingness and focused on Thomas, then looked at Teresa, then Thomas again.
Thomas stared in that direction, through the gap in the walls that served as an exit from the Glade.
" Thomas returned to the crude map, trying to visualize the Maze and see stone walls where Minho had penciled lines.
Dark shadows filled the depths of the wooded area, despite the time of day.
A loop of rough leather, fastened to the metal with a massive staple.
"Well, they’re doors.
"For some reason that last statement worried Thomas, though he hoped it didn’t show on his face.
"They’d just stepped outside the Map Room, the heavy door clanging shut behind them, when Newt and Alby walked up, neither one of them looking very happy.
But impossibly, they were gone—not even a sign of them in the emptiness that stretched below.
Tonight the Grievers better be scared.
He deserved to go home at night to a family who loved him, worried about him.
If we’re gonna die, let’s freakin’ do it fighting.
""Serious?"Thomas let out a sigh.
"Crap—it’s gone!
Thomas followed Newt as he hurried down the stairs and out of the Homestead into the bright light of midafternoon.
He leaned toward the glass of the window as she disappeared from his view up ahead.
"It’s just sitting up there—almost like that dead one we saw.
His emotions were scattered: appreciation for Minho standing up to everybody on his behalf, disbelief at Gally’s continuous belligerence, fear of what the final decision would be.
"I’m the bloody Chair right now, and if I hear one more buggin’ word out of turn from you, I’ll be arrangin’ another Banishing for your sorry butt.
His eyes slid back into normal position, focused on Thomas, clinging to life.
"Winston was an acne-covered kid, short but muscular, and it seemed to Thomas the Keeper liked his job way too much.
Thomas noticed small red lights flashing here and there along the wall’s face, moving about, stopping, turning off and on.
If Chuck was right, he’d just discovered a link to the rest of the boys.
Much preferring one over three, he ran straight toward the Griever that had chased him there.
Thomas expected more outbursts, but was surprised when everyone nodded their consent, even Gally.
Something he’d seen before, but through the safety of thick glass.
"Chuck paused.
""Sorry, I honestly don’t.
"Stick that sucker in someone who’s been stung and it saves ’em.
Before Thomas or anyone else could react, he’d already ripped one board free; he threw it to the ground.
Thomas hugged Chuck to his chest, squeezed him as tightly as possible, as if that could somehow bring him back, or show thanks for saving his life, for being his friend when no one else would.
Just be glad the Grievers only come out at night.
Chuck looked closely at Thomas and slowly broke into an uneasy grin.
Its phantom brother seemed to leap at him every time he blinked or rubbed his eyes.
" And so they’d gone back.
You should not have done that.
A line of small-leafed weeds ran along the edge of one of the stone blocks, tiny yellow flowers peeping through as if searching for the sun, long disappeared behind the enormous walls of the Glade.
"What’s the deal with those beetle blades?" he asked.
And we’ve kept fighting no matter how hopeless it’s gotten.
This seemed a good time to bring up one of the million questions bouncing through his brain.
Same thing goes for Teresa being sent here, her being used to trigger the Ending—whatever that means—the place being shut down, gray skies, on and on and on.
"Man, you are one butt-load of sunshine, let me tell you.
With a metallic scrape the doors were opened, and a puff of dust from the surrounding stone rose into the air.
"Thomas paused.
He held one of the papers up to the light, saw how it shone through with a milky glow.
Aren’t Minho and I the only ones who’ve survived a night out there?""That’s what I’m saying.
"Trust me, when nighttime strikes, you want to be in bed.
He didn’t know what the ultimate picture would be, but his next words almost felt like they were coming from someone else.
"What did you do?"Thomas, confused by the question, glanced at Teresa to see if she knew what he meant.
And so it went for him as they kept moving, those Gladers not used to running such distances gasping in huge gulps of air.
co we might see something.
""Then why is it so terrible out there?" What else didn’t he know about?Newt sighed.
The lightless elevator swayed back and forth as it ascended, turning the boy’s stomach sour with nausea; a smell like burnt oil invaded his senses, making him feel worse.
Taken care of these people?"Hey, look, it’s the Greenbean," one of the older boys called out.
Now the images are gettin’ up and gone, like that same somethin’ don’t like me remembering.
"He paused, and Thomas realized his face must’ve whitened even more when he heard that last part.
How long would he last?Stop, he told himself.
Thomas assumed Gally would retaliate, but he straightened instead, taking everyone in with his mad gaze.
Flickering fluorescent lights shone from the ceiling.
But it felt … right.
"Thomas, what’re you talking about?""Teresa and I were used by the Creators.
The lights cast eerie shadows across the Maze.
""Everyone knows what they’re getting into.
"Thomas followed him, with Chuck right behind, as they left the Council room and went down the hall toward a narrow, spiraling staircase that he hadn’t noticed before.
Thomas sucked in a big breath, as if he were about to start a race.
Newt was right—they’d better wait until night and hope that most of the Grievers were in the Maze, not inside their Hole.
"To talk to Teresa—what happened?" He waited anxiously for the next dump of bad news.
Anyone but Chuck.
"Newt only grinned.
Thomas shrieked before he could stop himself, jerked away from the window—but the thing bounced backward, leaving the glass undamaged.
It was straight, the walls, solid, with no hallways branching off.
Then Thomas stared in shock as up ahead the Griever dug in with its spikes and spun forward right up to the Cliff’s edge, then off, into the gray abyss.
"Everyone looked at Thomas; he simply nodded.
Winston had said for him to go on alone, that he’d hang around the Blood House, which was fine with Thomas.
Behind each one, a person—some men, some women, all of them pale and thin—sat observing the Gladers, staring through the glass with squinted eyes.
"But Newt thinks we should go tonight.
Thomas couldn’t imagine going out that way, but based on Ben’s last moments, psychotically thrashing and spitting and screaming, he no longer doubted the importance of the Glade rule that no one should enter the Maze except Runners, and then only during the day.
"But … how could you possibly blame her for the walls not closing?"Newt stepped up, lightly placed a hand on Alby’s chest and pushed him back.
"Thomas sucked in a deep breath, trying not to think about only being halfway done for the day.
Guess you’re right.
Something about that Griever being dead and then not dead, something about where it had gone once it sprang to life …Frustrated, he put it aside and sprinted to catch up.
"I hope the Changing doesn’t give us real memories—just plants fake ones.
If you got a thing for chicks in comas, right?" He snickered again.
Thomas finally snapped out of his daze and took off after his new—and only—friend.
I can’t believe you only have to be the Greenbean for one day.
Freak, that’s the Number One Rule, the only one you’ll never be forgiven for breaking.
But none of it makes sense yet.
The shaft of aluminum bowed in the middle, but only a little.
"And if you get lonely, you can talk to me with your…	trick all you want.
Thomas flipped up double thumbs; then he and Minho pulled on their backpacks and entered the Maze.
The pale, miserable boy still made no effort to resist, letting them drag him across the dusty stone of the courtyard.
Show ya why them buggin’ walls close shut every night.
Where would he take him, anyway?He pushed and pulled Alby back over to the crack that marked the entrance to the Glade, and propped him once more into a sitting position, leaning against the stone wall.
There’s a reason Gally accused me of so much stuff, and why everyone who’s gone through the Changing recognizes me.
Gradually, though, order was restored and everyone sat down.
The other one had gone after Chuck and was just about to swipe at the kid with a long blade.
"Haven’t you gotten desperate enough to stay out there overnight, see if maybe something opens while the walls are moving?"Minho looked up at him, a flash of anger in his eyes.
And now he was one of them.
"Cut the ivy now—you gotta get used to doing it on the run.
After so long in darkness, the light stabbed his eyes; he looked away, covering his face with both hands.
It’d seemed such a victory just to save his life, bring him back from a night in the Maze.
"He’s right here—talk to him.
But right now we’ve got worse problems.
He crouched so that his head was positioned just below where the person on the inside would be able to see him.
Then, finally, came the tears.
Hating how everyone gawked at him, heconcentrated on studying the place the boy had called the Glade.
Being this close to a place where Grievers might come out at any second was making him sweat.
"Minho!" Thomas shouted, filled with relief.
32coMinho woke Thomas before dawn, motioning with a flashlight to follow him back to the Homestead.
We’re gonna fight our way through to the Griever Hole, and Tommy here’s gonna punch in his little magic code and then we’re gonna get payback on the Creators.
" Chuck didn’t say anything, but Thomas thought he heard the slightest of sniffles.
Guilt racked him because he knew for a certainty he would trade any one of the Gladers in that room for Chuck.
Thomas felt the grin fade from his face.
"The woman looked back and forth between Thomas and Teresa, then let out a sigh.
" Thomas headed to the right, craning his neck to look high up at the wall, searching along the thick vines until he found the spot where Alby hung by his arms and legs far above them.
Now it’s time for the last test.
The third one planted a heavily spiked arm into the stone, but its momentum was too much.
Might as well fight the Grievers rather than sit around letting them pick us off one by one.
Sitting in the exact center of the page was the letter F.
43	Thomas felt a rush of different emotions: relief that it had worked, surprise, excitement, wonder at what it could lead to.
Eventually, his "buddy" did doze off, and based on the rumble of snores across the Glade, so did everyone else.
An odd, dilapidated wooden building near one of the corners of the square contrasted greatly with the gray stone.
" He wanted to go last to make sure a Griever didn’t get her or Chuck.
He looked as if someone were about to reveal the secret of immortal life.
His skin was back to full color, his eyes no longer crisscrossed with red veins; he seemed to have gained fifteen pounds in twenty-four hours.
"Why is everyone freaking out?
"It won’t let us enter the word PUSH," Thomas said absently, not really speaking to iDocChuk.
The slightest glow of early morning illuminated the Glade, turning everything dark blue and shadowed.
A dark-skinned boy frowned—the same one who’d welcomed him.
"One day you’ll all be grateful for what we’ve done for you.
A couple of them appeared to be just as fresh as the first one he’d examined.
" Gears were starting to shift into place inside Thomas’s head as well, almost as if a prior memory was beginning to break loose.
"Newt looked at Thomas, confused.
I think we finally know for sure that the Grievers are programmed to only kill one of us each day.
"The walls move all over the shuck place every evening—same time as our Doors close shut.
They dragged him across the floor; he fought them, squirmed, yelled to be iDocleftalone.
"Do it again—maybe we blinked weird or something.
Gally was one of the boys holding on to the ropes, ready to hoist her, Alby, and Newt out of the Box.
" The kitchen was small but had everything one needed to make a hearty meal.
The guy is mentally whacked, and you better send someone right now to throw him in the Slammer.
Do you think they cry at night?"Thomas was completely shocked to realize his eyes had filled with tears.
Have I gone completely insane?Chuck lay down with a laugh.
The walls moved out in the Maze?
Then, out of the corner of his eye, he noticed the other Gladers looking in the direction of the doors.
We’re being used and manipulated.
I’m reservin’ my recommendation until I hear everyone out.
Big fat nasty one.
Then he realized others were entering through the remaining three Glade openings, all of them running and looking as ragged as the guy who’d just whisked by him.
A booming explosion of ripping wood and broken glass thundered from somewhere upstairs, shaking the whole house.
Then the right leg.
" He paused, feeling a wave of sadness.
Up a winding flight of stairs.
About twenty feet across, the Map Room had concrete walls bare of any decoration.
"You’ll learn a lot in the next couple of days, start getting used to things.
"I used tocry.
Supplies cut, bloody gray skies, walls not closing.
""Done it before, haven’t you, Hercules?" Without smiling or even waiting for a response, Newt walked away, yelling at people to finish up and get inside the Homestead.
"All things happen for a purpose," she said, any sign of malice now gone from her voice.
He’d heard it with his ears.
His brown hair hung down over his ears and neck, scraping the tops of his shoulders.
Because no one who’d been stung and didn’t make it back by sunset has ever survived, we just assumed that was the point of no return—when it’s too late to get the Serum.
For some reason the clothing here surprised Thomas; it seemed like everyone should be wearing something more menacing—like prison garb.
"Figured I’d let ya sleep in after such a rough couple days.
It felt like a hundred years ago.
With the Grievers?The other Gladers murmured their conversations in hushed tones, an intense feeling of dreadful anticipation hanging over them like a patch of thick fog.
Newt stood just a couple of feet in front of the thick curtain of ivy on the wall.
""Well, I guess it doesn’t matter right now.
"But Alby was already drifting off, nodding slightly as his eyes closed.
Thomas knew he was a smart kid—he somehow felt it in his bones.
As soon as Newt set off to go and talk to the girl, Thomas silently slipped away, hoping no one would notice him in the excitement.
Part animal, part machine, the Griever rolled and clicked along the stone pathway.
"We have to be the ones to do it," Thomas said as they leaned their backs against craggy trees, the once-green leaves already starting to turn gray from the lack of artificial sunlight.
Of all days, this might be the most important to get out there.
Thomas realized he was staring off in a daze.
" Minho put his fingers to his lips, his eyes darting around to see ifanyone was looking at him.
Even after what he’d seen last night, even after witnessing the Griever through the window, he wanted to know.
He felt like a coward, but he knew that any fighting—and any deaths—would be in vain if they didn’t get that code punched, the door to the Creators opened.
Don’t you bloody do it!"The rods on the right wall seemed to reach like stretched-out arms for their home, grasping for those little holes that would serve as their resting place for the night.
Only one door had a light coming through the crack at the bottom.
"No, I don’t think that’s what it means—the walls not closing.
If we can fight off the Grievers long enough for someone to punch in the code and shut them down, then we can go through the door they come through.
Whoever it was, he must’ve been one of the first to die, because his grave looked the oldest.
" He paused to look around, making sure they were all listening.
"No one ever understood what I saw, what the Changing did to me!
No one argued.
Ben’s head snapped back as he was jerked forward, the Keepers pushing the pole toward the Maze outside the Glade.
Then one stepped back and drew up his gun, aimed.
"Thomas had an itch in the back of his mind, the same one he’d felt the very first time in this room.
Totally gone.
Maybe Gally was right.
" Thomas might not have admitted it if Chuck hadn’t opened up.
"Thomas laughed again, in disbelief that such a thing could be possible so soon after what they’d gone through.
But he was certain he hadn’t remembered anything about that when he’d gone through the Changing.
What anyone said.
She pointed at the dirty square of glass, empty but for its greenish glow of life.
"Just get me out of the Maze, and I’ll be one happy dude.
Baggers went to get him … arrow missed his brain … Med-jacks patched him up.
"Everyone knows what happened.
"Thomas waited for Chuck to laugh or smile, thinking it had to be a joke—who ever heard of someone being cut in half?
The Builders had boarded up the gaping holes left by the monsters who’d carried off Gally and Adam.
Frypan—Newt told Thomas that the Cook had been one of the last Keepers to agree to go—was in charge of gathering all the food and figuring out a way to distribute it evenly among the packs.
He stopped when Newt did, right next to the massive wall towering above them like a skyscraper—another random image that floated in the murky pool of his memory wipe.
Every last one of those who’d stayed behind and fought was covered in Griever sludge and human blood, their clothes ripped to shreds.
The light was dim, but any obstructions loomed as darker shadows and he was able to make his way quickly along.
Even the birds had quieted, like they’d gone to bed for the night, and the sound of insects was barely noticeable, or at least much less than normal.
He stared straight down, saw that the stone wall of the Maze went toward the ground in a sheer cliff until it disappeared into whatever lay far, far below.
A purpose for the code?Thomas paused, not really wanting to talk about it yet—not before he really gathered his thoughts.
Longest one they could possibly make.
Then you turn into some kind of freaky jungle dude, climbing vines and tying people up on walls.
"Why aren’t you one?"Newt’s gaze returned to Thomas, sharply.
""Which one is this?" Thomas asked; he knelt down next to it, eager to get started.
One last breath wheezed from his mouth.
" He knew that she could only help, that she might still remember something valuable.
"Thomas helped Minho as they scrabbled around the corners and crannies of the Maze, picking up as many loose stones as possible.
Thomas walked a few feet along the wall until he found a thick growth of ivy covering most of the stone.
He couldn’t see how the mammoth walls could possibly be mobile—felt so sure of it he relaxed, thinking Chuck was just playing a trick on him.
"Where are we going?" Thomas asked, still feeling the weight of seeing those walls close, thinking about the maze, the confusion, the fear.
Time to stay out there and see if anything opens up when the walls move.
Newt had adamantly refused when Thomas asked to see the person he’d risked his life for.
"What a night.
Thomas finally followed suit, Newt right beside him; everyone huddled against the far wall, staring at the window.
The walls had to be hundreds of feet high and formed a perfect square around them, each side split in the exact middle by an opening as tall as the walls themselves that, from what Thomas could see, led to passages and long corridors beyond.
"No sun for the plants," Newt said, "no supplies from the bloody Box—yeah, I’d say we’re shucked, all right.
He shuffled his body to the right as far as the plant would let him, then let go and grabbed another one.
"With that the man made a few motions to his companions, then turned and ran out the big glass doors, his gun held rigidly before him.
"Complete silence filled the room, as if the world had been frozen, and every member of the Council stared at Minho.
At the last second, the front Keeper somehow loosened the larger pole from the piece attached to Ben and yanked it back into the Glade, leaving the boy to his Banishment.
Thomas felt a sharp pang and closed his eyes as he sank deeper into the misery of the night.
It was a miracle Thomas hadn’t stabbed someone’s eye out with his spear.
The instant the discarded slab hit the floor of the room, the glass of the window exploded inward like a swarm of crystal wasps.
Thomas found a tree in the Deadheads, one of the nicer ones on the edge of the forest with plenty of shade.
How different would things be right now if it weren’t for that one boy?
"Just hold on!" "Well, what’s wrong?" someone yelled back.
The light was so dull now that he almost felt as if he were looking through black mist.
It looked like he wasn’t done keeping secrets after all.
Dawn was beginning to make its mark, the sky seeming to have lightened considerably even in the last minute or so.
No one else knew the weird things Teresa had said, or accused him of.
He grinned inside—he could only imagine Newt’s response to that request.
Someone shook Thomas awake.
The corridors out there looked much the same as the ones he’d seen from the window by the East Door early that morning.
Just when it grew unbearable—just as Thomas realized the Griever was right outside the window —everything fell silent.
He was young—probably the youngest of any in the group he’d seen so far, maybe twelve or thirteen years old.
Minho stood quickly, taking everyone off guard.
And what you wrote on your arm, and what you said about a code, it all has to mean something, right?" It has to, he thought.
This one left Minho’s hand, sailed forward, almost in the exact center of the Cliff line, started its descent to the unseen ground far below.
co.
His eyes remained on Gally, lying there, still; Thomas could feel the hatred pouring out, as if a visible line of flame connected them.
co.
Thomas found Minho and Teresa talking to each other near the left side of the Door, going overthe hastily made plans to enter the escape code once they got into the Hole.
As Chuck fumbled about with dishes and things from the fridge, Thomas pulled out a wooden chair from a small plastic table and sat down.
As Thomas got his bearings, he realized they were standing in a ten- foot-high stone cylinder.
It wasn’t until Chuck stopped right in front of him, panting to catch his breath, that he finally looked up.
One by one they went until only he remained with Thomas and Teresa.
"The last dead end," he said to Thomas.
But no one said a word; all eyes were glued to the girl, now lying there as if asleep, her chest rising and falling with shallow breaths.
The image of it was the last straw.
We’ve sworn our lives to fighting WICKED.
Alby spoke in a loud, almost ceremonious voice, looking at no one and everyone at the same time.
I think Gally was right—they’re gonna just keep killing us.
Thomas thought, feeling his own anger light up.
"Minho pointed at the Maps in Thomas’s hand, letting out a frustrated sigh.
He followed Newt to the second door on the right and watched as the older boy knocked lightly; a moan sounded in reply.
Maybe we were meant all along to be the ones to reveal how to escape.
The thought surprised him, as if its source had been founded in actual memory, a wisp of light in the darkness of his mind.
So Minho’s going to train me?""That’s right—you’re a Runner now.
No one dies if they make it back in time to get the Serum.
"If you’re looking for a goodnight kiss, forget it.
He selected a short silvery dagger with a rubber grip, then one with a long black blade.
I’ve been here two years, and I’ve never seen anything like it.
I’m with Thomas one hundred percent.
Seeing it all now—the beast matched with the sounds—Thomas couldn’t think of any nightmare that could equal this hideous thing coming toward him.
They ended up near the back of the Homestead—that was what Chuck called the leaning structure of wood and windows—in a dark shadow between the building and the stone wall behind it.
If your girlfriend gets lonely for you, I’ll give her some lovin’.
He was looking left and right, though the collar around his neck prevented him from seeing the pole and Keepers behind him.
The sounds grew louder—the awful, awful sounds.
The room continued its ascent, swaying; Thomas grew immune to the ceaseless rattling of the chains that pulled him upward.
"Still gives me the chills thinkin’ I might have gone through the Changing.
Was that really just yesterday?Someone tapped him on the elbow; he looked over to see Chuck by his side again.
A Griever spun directly in his path; a boy, his face hidden from sight, was clutched in its claws, stabbing viciously into the thick, whalish skin, trying to escape.
Just one person again, he thought.
The sky was a dull slab of gray—not the natural pale light of morning.
Thomas and Minho found nothing but stone walls and ivy.
Newt had finally snapped out of his daze and pushed Gally away.
"Ya know, it was really stupid for us to sleep in here tonight.
Wicked instrument-tipped appendages protruded from its body like arms: a saw blade, a set of shears, long rods whose purpose could only be guessed.
"Anyone else go through that?"But Newt’s face was blank.
At some point a knife had made an appearance, gripped in his right hand.
Blue eyes shone through an otherwise pitiful face, flabby and flushed.
The jungles were gone, but the insects weren’t.
It made Thomas feel off-kilter, as if the urge to sleep that grew steadily with every passing minute were somehow unnatural.
"Gally, shut your bloody hole—there’s a Griever right out the window.
Despite all his ideas—all the things he’d pitched to Minho—he wasn’t eager to change how things had been done for the last two years.
He wondered why the Grievers were just waiting—the beetle blades had obviously let them know the Gladers were coming.
But even that wasn’t as bad as the heavy emotional weight of what he’d been through the previous night.
Come every week for two years, same time, same day.
His eyes finally focused through the initial blindness of fear, and he realized it was Minho, with one of Alby’s arms draped across his shoulders, practically dragging the boy along behind him.
A few snickers escaped the crowd, and Gally looked around, his face bright red.
" She motioned behind her with a thumb.
The language was odd, and none of the boys seemed to care whether he lived or died.
"Over two years, and so few dead.
"  Minho sighed.
Relief filled him when the vine held.
The Runners had returned at their normal time, and Thomas had grown more and more upset as he watched Newt run from Door to Door as they entered the Glade, not bothering to hide his panic.
No one liked him except for his few shuck cronies.
Everyone gobbled up his food and usually begged for more.
They were even more menacing in the faded gray light.
Thomas thought about how he’d always felt a connection to her, ever since she arrived in the Glade.
As Thomas was settling into the soft mattress for the night, he was interrupted.
"At first, Thomas thought it was another message in his head; he squeezed his fists against his ears.
A chorus of questions filled the air as everyone began pushing forward to get a look into the small opening.
"I’m sure we have a lot to do before the Grievers come back tonight— if they don’t come during the day.
Thomas watched in anticipation as Newt and Alby took positions on opposite sides of the shaft doors—a crack split the metal square right down the middle.
"I’ll get you something—but I swear this is the last time.
The sounds of the onrushing Grievers grew closer, but he had to see.
Finally, he was left alone, his head resting on the softest pillow his limited memory could recall.
"Yeah, tried that one.
They’re huge, and they look like they’ve been standing here for a thousand yearsiDoc.
Minho seemed to know exactly what he was doing, where he was going; he never paused to think about which way they should run.
"One … two … three!"They lifted her with a quick jerk, almost throwing her up in the air—she was obviously a lot lighter than they’d thought—and Thomas almost shouted at them to be more careful.
They all wore black coats over white shirts, a word stitched on their right breast—he couldn’t quite make out what it said.
" Thomas looked around one more time, embarrassed, confused, angry.
And I’m right.
"A couple of hours later, the doors having reopened, rumbling and grumbling and shaking the ground until they were finished, Thomas sat at a worn, tilted picnic table outside the Homestead.
Thomas felt his heart tremble, hoped it wasn’t someone he knew.
"Looks like you’re not giving me much choice on that one.
A bright light on the end of one arm pointed directly at Thomas, only this time, the beam didn’t move away.
It was strange to know that the night grew later, that darkness should’ve swallowed the world around them, but to see only the pale gray light outside.
" Alby showed the slightest hint of a smile, a bare crack in his usually hard face.
We wanna see the police, the mayor, the president—somebody!" Thomas worried what Minho might do—then again, Thomas kind of wanted him to go punch her in the face.
" She looked past him at the Homestead, then focused on him again.
"Am I … replacing someone?
We somehow got it into our klunk heads that once the Doors closed, you were done—end of story.
Another snap, this time louder, almost like someone had broken a stick over their knee.
Someone, he couldn’t tell who, obeyed Newt’s order; he was being carried across the courtyard, through the front door of the Homestead, down the shattered hall, into a room, placed on a couch.
"He lightly slapped Thomas’s shoulder, then stepped back, gesturing up the stairs.
No movement, no light, no sound.
Newt let out a long sigh.
Everything was provided for us, and the problem was laid out as one of the most common puzzles known to civilization—a maze.
Then she focused on her arm.
Without fail, everyone looked away.
He walked past Ben and along the pole, picking it up off the ground as he slid its length through his palm and fingers.
Shuck it all and kiss a Griever goodnight.
But whether one person or many would die, he had no clue.
"Someone snickered and Thomas quit talking, hoping he’d gotten his point across.
"That first night, when you were bragging about being a Runner and all that klunk—shuck it, I was laughing inside so hard.
She paused for a long time before answering.
If there’s some kind of optical illusion hiding an exit from this place, I don’t wanna be the one who screws up when the first shank tries to jump into it.
Otherwise, Newt had ordered all lights extinguished despite the pale, deathly glow of their new sky—no sense attracting any more attention than necessary.
"When I first woke up, it was like I’d entered an insane asylum— these strange guys hovering over my bed, the world tipping around me, memories swirling in my brain.
How could anyone ever be happy in a life like this?
The only sounds were the eerie moans and whirrs of machinery coming from the Grievers, sitting there as if enjoying the little trap they’d set for the humans.
As he did so, Thomas heard a shout to his right, sensed movement.
"All four of them looked over at the steel doors attached to the ground.
Though no one admitted it, Thomas bet most of them were banking on the theory that only one person would be killed by the Grievers, and they figured their chances o f not being the unlucky sap were decent.
The second thing he learned about himself, as if the night in the Maze hadn’t proved it already, was that his body was in perfect shape.
All I have are faint impressions—that you and I were important, that we were used somehow.
"Minho sighed, clearly irritated, then muttered something under his breath.
The creature disappeared from sight, a shadow swallowed by more shadow.
"Teresa?" he finally asked through the barred window of the lightless cell.
Minho hit a switch and several rows of fluorescent lights flickered until they came on full strength, revealing the room in detail.
Looked up at Teresa and her enormous blue eyes, heavy with sadness—just as much for him as for Chuck, he was sure of it.
" Thomas knew what he meant, but waited for Minho’s explanation anyway.
"We put you in the Slammer at night to keep you safe—brought you back here during the days.
No one said a word.
Tonight we’re taking the fight back to the Creators, no matter what we have to go through to get there.
A couple of blankets had been placed over him during the night—someone playing the Glade Mother.
Newt sat down and motioned to Zart.
Whatever the explanation, whatever that had been in the sky, the real sun or not, it was gone.
" He’d decided the night before not to tell anyone else how strangely familiar the place seemed, the odd feeling that he’d been there before— that he could remember things about it.
Tried to send a slinthead Greenie back in the Box one time—thing wouldn’t move till we took him out.
Let them do the fighting—we have to get through that Hole.
Probably —surely someone had told him.
He cried out as someone jerked him backward, ripping his hand out of Teresa’s—he saw her spin around just in time to watch as he slammed into the ground, throwing up a spray of water.
"She’s right, Chuck—you saved us, man!
Thomas winced; Frypan had gone too far with that recommendation, almost invalidating his well-stated opinion of the whole mess.
At least twenty feet across, the break in the wall went all the way to the top, far above.
The creeping shadows of the walls didn’t reveal the time or direction—it could be early morning or late afternoon.
" Minho stood up holding a pair of sleek silver ones.
"You’re right—you’re right!
But it was already gone.
Most of the kids wandered away then, each one giving Thomas a lingering look before they walked off.
It took all of his effort, but he said one last thing before the darkness took him for good.
What is it?Thomas leaned back on the bench and put his right foot up on his knee, wondering how Teresa would react to what he was going to say.
"They’ll only kill you one a night … their stupid Variables …"Thomas listened in awe, trying to suppress his fear so he could memorize everything the crazed boy said.
" Chuck quietly stepped up onto a big wooden box that sat right under the window.
After one day.
And don’t let anyone fool you.
Thomas watched on as at first no one seemed to hear or notice Newt at all.
I’ll freaking work every Glader to the bone studying those things.
All was a blur, bloody and gray and flashes of steel; Thomas tried not to look left or right, only ahead, through the narrow gap formed by the Gladers.
" He paused, shook his head.
He looked about the room like a rabid dog searching for someone to bite.
He skidded to a iDocstp,right.
Deeper it went, its red light glowing brighter as the surroundings darkened.
He looked up, looked side to side, examined the massive slabs of stone as the uneasy feeling blossomed into outright dread.
You’ve proven more in one night than most trainees do in weeks.
After another couple of bites, Thomas finally asked the question that had been bothering him.
"Someone burned all the Maps.
Are you sure they’re in the right order?"She took the paper back from him.
At least, we think that’s when, because we never really hear walls moving any other time.
A sharp crack revealed a small victory, but any elation ended when he realized that the momentum of his swing was now pulling him backdown to land right on top of the creature.
What did I ever do to this kid?He looked up, wanting answers, but Alby was already gone, a trembling branch the only sign he’d ever stood there in the first place.
The Gladers compressed into a tighter group around him, everyone facing outward, huddled together in the center of the T intersection.
Thomas couldn’t believe he was still looking upon a human being—the madness in Ben’s eyes, the phlegm flying from his mouth, the pale skin stretched taut across his veins and bones.
How do we know it was the Greenie who tied Alby up there?"Gally paused; no one said a word for several seconds, and panic rose inside Thomas’s chest.
"But I thought the Grievers only came out at night.
He seemed genuinely interested and ready to understand.
It looked as if a tornado had touched down right in the middle of the room.
The woman yelped when one of the rescuers grabbed her with both hands and yanked her off of Thomas, who recovered his wits and scrambled to his feet.
Finally , Thomas thought, something went right.
hisco right ear—"it’s about to happen.
The world seemed to spin, a swirling mist of faces and color and light.
There were numbered circles running down the left side, one to six.
His mind was racing, wondering what Alby remembered, what he knew, what he might say about him.
Newt looked confused.
It seemed like a monster, a horror from a nightmare, but Thomas knew it had to be a Glader, someone who’d completely lost his mind.
Being the center of attention again could only bring more suspicion about him.
Thomas found most of the Gladers standing near the entrance to the Box, pointing at the dead sky, everyone talking at once.
"Alby’s eyes fluttered open—bloodshot orbs that glistened in the light.
It didn’t last a minute.
The Griever’s spikes tore into the stone, throwing shredded ivy and rock chips in every direction.
The floor of the courtyard looked like it was made of huge stone blocks, many of them cracked and filled with long grasses and weeds.
He thought about flashlights and his memory.
A thick lump grew in his throat.
Get kissed goodnight.
Steeling his nerves, he tapped his spear against the stone ground, then planted his left foot on the very edge of the Cliff and jumped, catapulting up and into the twilight air.
Thomas could barely listen anymore, anticipating the comments from the last two Keepers, Gally and Minho.
His last ounce of strength disappeared, and he curled into a ball on the ground.
He imagined beetle blades out there, helping the creatures find their way.
Gladers ran about, everyone talking at once.
""Still …""Quit your bellyachin’ and pick a couple.
He spotted Newt, kneeling there in the middle, leaning over a body.
The nasty creature was terrifying to think about, but he wondered why finding a dead one was such a big deal.
Nobody!"It was the first time Thomas had actually liked hearing something come out of Alby’s mouth.
Thomas refused.
It was useless—the greasy stuff covered every inch of the stone; he couldn’t grip anything.
" Alby jabbed a thumb over his shoulder, then paused.
Chuck stumbled backward, then looked up at Thomas, his eyes so full of fright Thomas felt something shatter in his heart.
He looked like he’d just run twenty miles, face red, skin covered in sweat, clothes soaked.
And they close up every night.
And the air had brightened ever so slightly; he could make out more of the details of the Maze than he’d been able to just minutes before.
He looked as confused as Thomas felt.
No one looked at Gally, breathing but still.
It climbed the opposite wall, then leaped at the thick-glassed window with a loud thump.
"Yeah, well, things pretty much suck right about now.
But it won’t let me type in the last word.
""So it ran away from you guys?" From what Thomas had seen only a few nights before, he couldn’t imagine it.
They stood at the opposite end of the long, dark hallway from the usual staircase, the one Thomas had climbed on his very first day to see Ben.
"Well, they found a dead Griever, right?" "Yeah," Newt replied.
No one else said a word, most of them staring at Chuck’s body without expression, as if they’d moved far beyond feeling.
He turned and faced Alby, still propped against the stone wall, now only a mound of shadow in the darkness.
"Thomas refused to break eye contact but decided to say nothing.
Thomas looked up at the enormous walls covered in thick vines—desperation had finally clicked him into problem-solving mode.
But the thought that what he’d just seen might happen to Chuck—or Teresa …Minho moved closer to Thomas and Newt, squeezed Newt’s shoulder.
Thomas squeezed his eyes against the blinding light of the sun as he emerged from the woods.
He’d now been at the Glade for roughly twenty-four hours.
I’d expect more maturity from someone who’s passed the Maze Trials.
He was done.
How could these walls move?
The next hour or so was a blur of sights and sounds for Thomas.
"Thomas rolled his eyes ever so slightly at Minho—so tired of Alby’s attitude.
co.
You’re shameful, and any one of you who stays here is no better.
"I bet Minho’s the one who actually got rid of the stupid things.
The anticipation of fighting was almost worse than the fear of it.
Ben’s final screams were cut off when the walls closed with a terrible boom.
Thomas knew he was thinking about how Alby might never be the same again.
The sounds of shuffling feet echoed up the walls and the red lights of the beetle blades flashed more menacingly in the ivy—the Creators were certainly watching, listening.
Go, one shank’ll die.
To bother noticing what freaking time it is!"Thomas looked at his watch, realizing with horror what he’d missed, knowing what Alby was about to say before he said it.
Alby’s eyes narrowed; his mouth pulled into a tight grin that didn’t look like it had anything to do with humor.
He couldn’t remember much, but something told him he’d never disliked someone so strongly.
He scanned the compound of the Glade, this new place of nightmares where he seemed destined to live.
No one said it, but Thomas knew it wouldn’t be long before the Doors closed.
Or worse?"Yeah, right," Chuck whispered, staring at the wooden steps in a daze.
cointhe Glade might not be sweet livin’, but at least it’s safe.
However, if there was one thing his gut told him, it was not to admit to any doubt.
They reached the huge split that led outside to more stone pathways.
Thomas sucked in a huge gulp of air, then another, feeling the pinch of the vines tied around his chest.
So, when do I get a shot with the Runners?" Thomas waited patiently to get some sort of actual information from Chuck.
The grave markers had been painted white, but by someone in an obvious hurry—gelled globs coveredthem and bare streaks of wood showed through.
They got to work, tracing from original Maps to wax paper, one by one, trying to keep it clean and correct while hurrying as fast as possible.
""Alby’s the one who won’t let the girl out," Newt said with a nod toward the Homestead.
More than anything, he wanted to be alone.
"Like you said—stay here, one shank’ll die tonight.
He hoped Alby would say what he wanted and be done with it.
"Minho had looked him square in the face for the first time with that last sentence, and Thomas scooted back a few inches before he could stop himself.
Newt went after him, right on his heels, and then the rest of the Gladers followed, a tight pack of roaring boys charging ahead to a bloody battle, weapons raised.
""He’s not one of us!" Ben shouted.
He picked them up and settled in, snuggling up against the comforting corner where the stone walls met in a mass of soft ivy.
So back off!"Alby leaned back slightly, stared absently at Thomas for several seconds.
Thomas kept following Minho’s orders—they continued until they’d marked a line reaching at least a dozen feet from the Cliff, then moved their target pattern a foot to the right and started coming back toward the Maze.
The subjects will be allowed one full night’s sleep before Stage 2 implementation.
As long as everyone fights.
They’d then tossed the loose ends over the Cliff, until they hit the Griever Hole, where now six or seven vines ran from the stone edge to an invisible rough square, hovering in the empty sky, where they disappeared into nothingness.
That she might talk to people.
"Thomas groaned inwardly as he stepped inside and saw the one piece of furniture—an ugly, rickety chair with one leg obviously shorter than the rest, probably on purpose.
She glanced up when he entered, but then returned her gaze to whatever it was she held.
The feeling—the epiphany—was a strange one, foreign and familiar at the same time.
"Thomas refused to believe it.
Chuck had tried to act brave from the time he first found out they were going for it, but his sweaty skin and dazed eyes revealed the truth.
Fear, loneliness, desperation, sadness, even the slightest hint of joy.
They threw enough rocks to cover the entire left half of the area in front of them, covering the distance anyone—or anything—could possibly jump.
Thomas watched as Minho tried desperately to get him back on his feet, then, finally giving up, started to drag the boy across the stone floor by the arms.
The ivy was especially thick there; it made the world seem green and lush, hiding the hard, impenetrable stone.
You’re right.
None of us remember anything, and we’re bloody sick of you reminding us.
Twilight fell upon the Glade and Alby’s screams continued to haunt the air.
Ah, my Knight in Shining Armor.
They hit a dirt floor, and Thomas couldn’t see a thing until Minho turned on a single lightbulb by pulling a string.
A deathly silence sucked the life out of the air as every last Glader stared at the row of windows, at the row of observers.
"What do you call those big openings?" Chuck pointed up at the enormously tall gaps in the walls.
He peered back at Thomas, hatred furrowing his brow and crinkling his monstrous nose.
It was too dark to make out clearly, but odd lights flashed from an unknown source, revealing blurs of silver spikes and glistening flesh.
I’m done.
What about everybody else?"Minho stumbled toward the curved wall of the tunnel, then leaned there, gulping big breaths.
Hate to say it, but if one of us dies, that’s better than all of us.
Soon as we’re done eating, I need to find him and throw his butt in jail.
"Yeah, I guess, but—" "Just promise!"Thomas paused, sick of Alby and his attitude.
I mean, last few nights, sitting in the Homestead, just waiting for a Griever to come in and steal one of us was the worst thing I’ve ever done.
"There’re forty-one of us.
But Thomas could think of only one thing.
"Hurry!"Thomas motioned for Teresa to do it.
Someone sprinted past Thomas, bumped him.
Thomas would have to convince him somehow that stress had finally overwhelmed him and a good night’s rest had solved everything.
But he knew that everything might depend on it.
In fact, with the freaking walls not closing anymore, I think we should try your idea—stay out there overnight and do some deeper exploring.
Thomas felt a pang of sadness—it was possible he might never see Chuck or Teresa or any of them again.
"Whacker, if we told you everything, you’d die on the spot, right after you klunked your pants.
" He trailed off, already confused at what order he should tell things in.
"Thomas quietly sighed in relief.
" Minho pulled out two chairs and sat in one of them.
If those shanks don’t make it back …" He paused, seeming hesitant to say what everyone was thinking.
Gally was an idiot, but he couldn’t possibly be stupid enough to stay out in the Maze all night.
But now he was gone, Banished to the world of the Grievers, taken to wherever they took their prey, victim to whatever was done there.
Before Thomas could look up from tying his shoes, a plastic wristwatch dropped into his lap.
But now Chuck was gone.
He thought about his conversation with Chuck, wondered how it would feel to have parents say good night to you.
Med-jack said you were there one second and buggin’ gone the next.
It won’t let me enter the last word!
So—" But before he could finish his sentence the rumble of the walls opening for the day cut him off.
Thomas shared a bunk with Minho, who insisted on sleeping up top; Newt and Frypan were right next to them.
The thought ended his brief moment of calm, stirring in his mind a million possibilities of what might live in the maze outside, all of them terrifying.
Maybe he’d had his one and only turn of bad luck.
Seeing Alby go down like that … a new kind of pain he’d never felt before filled his insides—an ill, disturbed pain; it felt worse than the physical kind.
"How many have died, then?"Minho stared at the ground, crouched with one forearm on a knee.
Don’t you think we would’ve noticed if it were spelling out freaking words?""Maybe it’s too hard to see with the naked eye, just comparing one day to the next.
When both were secure, Thomas did the same to Alby’s arms—right, then left.
"Shank’s got more guts than I’ve fried up from every pig and cow in the last year.
Giving up, he lay back down, hoping no one would bother him.
At the last second before collision, just as he got a close look at the metal and hair and slime, Thomas planted his left foot and dove to the right.
Newt was there, too, but sat alone, ignoring everybody.
"And Thomas knew he was right.
Thomas felt one final moment of trepidation, a quick slice of fear through his body, and then it vanished.
Are you done?""Yes, I’m done.
"You guys really have this all thought out, don’t you?""Couple of years runnin’ your butt off every day, you figure out what you need and ask for it.
The walls were really closing— trapping him inside the Glade.
That grin sent a wave of reassurance through Thomas, as if he were finding out the world was okay again.
"I found a dead one.
All as nasty as the one you peeped on last night.
"All right, Greenie," Alby said, looking much better as he sat in the middle of the semicircle of chairs, next to Newt.
A dark depression that might never leave—memories of Chuck and his brutal murder.
A few seconds later the shadow stopped; the light settled to a standstill, casting three unmoving planes of brightness into the room.
By the time he’d crossed the threshold into the Glade, the Doors were only minutes away from closing for the night.
But he was going to do everything possible to make sure Chuck wasn’t one of them.
He began to think how easy it would be without …He refused to finish the thought.
" Thomas had the same strange urge he’d had the night before—to reach out and take one of her hands.
Despite his lack of memory, he was sure he’d just been through the most traumatic night of his life.
"Every word from the kid was like a fist punching Thomas in the gut, making him feel more guilty and confused.
He willed his eyes to adjust as he squinted toward the light and those speaking.
sayco another word, worried he’d mess up this new sense of being encouraged, eradicate the reassuring calm that filled his heart.
"The last statement struck Thomas deep down.
Inside the room, Newt and Alby crouched over someone lying on a bed.
All I know is I saw two people struggling to get inside these walls and they couldn’t make it.
cor the second time in twenty- four hours, Chuck had nailed it.
"She paused, took a breath.
All three of them looked at him, annoyed, as if he had no right to speak.
" He paused, gathering his thoughts one last time.
Not cloudy, not twilight, not the early minutes of dawn.
""Be careful," Chuck said, his tone quickly melting into genuine concern.
The chorus of voices had grown silent, but someone spoke as they yanked him over the sharp edge of the dark box.
"It’s like if you tried to ride a bicycle here—if they had one.
Couldn’t something be done for him?
Thomas leaned back against the rough rock, overcome by disbelief at what he had just done.
I’m not really the newest Newbie anymore, right?
I mean … I remember riding one, but not learning.
No one’s ever become a Runner in their first month, much less their first week.
You’re way ahead of me and everybody else.
Next to each one was a word written in big blocky letters.
The shadows from the walls had lengthened considerably, already creeping up the sides of the ivy-covered stone faces on the other side.
And as the time passed, Thomas let the slightest trickle of hope enter his system—maybe they’d make it before getting attacked.
A crowd was gathered in the middle of the courtyard around the steel doors through which Thomas was startled to realize he’d arrived just yesterday.
"Hurry!"They did, forming into a tight pack behind the door as they entered, one by one.
"Two years we’ve tried to solve this thing, no luck.
How many times I gotta tell ya?" He paused, then let out a sigh.
But they’ve always studied them section by section, comparing one day to the next.
"All right.
He wanted to scream at the monster below him: Kill me or go back to your hiding hole!Then, in a sudden burst of light and sound, the Griever came back to life, whirring and clicking.
Newt had paused, looking confused.
But after we were taken, we spent the next few years learning in special schools, living somewhat normal lives until they were finally able to finance and build the Maze.
The walls slammed shut behind him, the echo of its boom bouncing off the ivy-covered stone like mad laughter.
Newt pushed open the door, the slight creak once again reminding Thomas of some vague childhood memory of haunted-house movies.
It’s been two bloody years, ya know.
Minho stood, his face barely visible in the dying light.
When they finally had a sizable pile, they hauled it over right next to the edge and took a seat, feet dangling over the side.
They stood in a vast courtyard several times the size of a football field, surrounded by four enormous walls made of gray stone and covered in spots with thick ivy.
Unlike two nights ago, Teresa was allowed to stay in the building with the rest of the Gladers.
He and Newt had just joined Chuck for breakfast at a picnic table right outside the KitiDochenwhen.
"I remember remembering," she muttered, sitting down with a heavy sigh; she pulled her legs up to wrap her arms around her knees.
"Any idiot on the planet would’ve done that.
"You mean we’re going to stay out there overnight?
cost midnight.
"Thomas was relieved they were alone.
Plus, based on the last couple of days, the Runner was home hours early.
This is your brilliant suggestion?"Thomas refused to admit how bad that sounded, but an idea hit him.
"Oh, you’ll know good and well by the time sun sets tonight.
He moved through the markers until he got to a grave covered with a sheet of grimy plastic or glass, its edges slimed with filth.
It’s about time someone stood up to his klunk.
When his malicious stare fell back on Thomas, he had one last thing to say.
He remembered the odd lights he’d observed through the Glade window with Newt.
Alby and a few others were right behind him.
"Thomas was baffled by this girl—first the connection he’d felt to her from the very beginning, then the mind-speaking, now this.
She did seem familiar; he felt a connection to her, though it was impossible to grasp in his mind.
A couple of hours later, Thomas was lying in a soft sleeping bag next to Chuck on a bed of grass near the gardens.
Both boys ran in at the Griever and jumped feetfirst at the creature, kicking out at the last second with every waning bit of strength.
As they kept walking, he focused his attention on the other side of the Glade, the section Alby had called the Deadheads.
An hour after that, a Griever came charging through the Maze right past them, not even pausing.
On he ran, left and right, straight, on and on.
"Ah, glad to know you guys are buddies now.
No offense, Greenie, but Newt, you’re the one always harping about order.
Well, good night.
He broke one of our most important rules.
" Thomas perked up at that, confused by the statement.
From top to bottom, side to side, the place was covered in all kinds of machinery and wires and ducts and computers.
cohe remembered what Alby said about the moving walls.
"Someone stop them!
Something about it was familiar, right on the edge of his mind.
Why are you grilling me like this?" All Thomas wanted right then was for night to fall, so he could be alone, go to sleep.
"Wait!" Thomas shrieked, but no one heard him.
But do you remember learning to ride one?""No.
"Alby had folded his arms, still glaring at the Box as if trying to open the doors with his mind.
"Newbies aren’t allowed to see someone who’s been … taken.
Alby was only stuck with one of those needles, right?"Minho stood up and joined Thomas in his slow walk back toward the Glade.
"She hot?"Thomas paused, not having thought of her in that way since she’d freaked out and delivered the note and her one-liner—Everything is going to change.
So, how much do you remember?He paused.
"But I don’t get why none of us remembered this stuff.
Favoring his bad leg, he tiptoed toward the lone window in the room, which was covered by three hastily nailed boards.
"That’s a promise, right?""Promise.
This strange connection he felt wasn’t his alone.
Had it never happened before?Alby looked like someone had just told him he could grow wings and fly.
" He paused.
"Teresa put her hands through the bars, rested her forearms against the concrete sill.
"Know what?" He looked at Chuck again, confused by his big smile.
I slammed my head on the table so you’d think it was someone else, I lied, burned it all.
"What do you think we’ve been doing for two years?""Trust me, you’ve never been to this spot.
I’m the only Runner in this group, and the only other one here who’s even been out in the Maze is Newt.
It was like somebody had built the Maze and then set it afloat in the sky to hover there in the middle of nothing for the rest of eternity.
Tears moistened Newt’s eyes, and Thomas was sure that even within the dark chamber of memories that were locked away, out of his reach, he’d never seen someone look so sad.
The next morning, someone gently shook him awake.
"As they walked over, Thomas asked the one question he hadn’t posed yet.
Your life might depend on it.
" "And probably where they come from," Thomas said as he took one last look at theiDochdden.
"All right, we gotta take good notes.
Thomas leaned against the tree as he waited for Chuck.
On one side of the room—to his right—there was a row of forty or so large white pods that looked like enormous coffins.
"The walls, you shuck.
Menacing shadows clung to the boxes of weapons scattered across the table and floor, blades and sticks and other nasty-looking devices seeming to wait there, ready to take on a life of their own and kill the first person stupid enough to come close.
Teresa paused, then said something that made no sense.
Teresa had been right from the beginning—everything had changed.
Thomas noticed people in the Blood House pens glancing around, apparently just as confused.
Neither one of them said anything for a while, a sense of hopelessness wafting between their minds.
In the distance, more breaks in the walls led to other paths, and farther down, maybe a hundred yards or so away, the straight passage came to a dead end.
"Yeah— they got Zart and a couple others.
Another scream, this one long and nerve-grinding, tore through the air and Thomas’s heart lurched.
Refusing to put his feet down or help the progress in any way, he seemed as dead as the last time Thomas had seen him.
"They’re the ones take care of all the heavy stuff for the Gardens.
"You’ve always had one Runner assigned to one section, right?""Right," Minho replied.
Thomas knelt down in front of it and took out the Map from the day before and held it up side by side with the one he’d just drawn.
He was utterly confused.
Someone tapped his shoulder and he opened his eyes to see Newt staring down at him.
" Chuck stopped and pointed to someone in the crowd.
"I put in all the words and one by one they appeared on the screen; then something beeped and they’d disappear.
Thomas had contemplated just jumping into the Hole right away and trying to punch in the code quickly, but he had no idea what to expect or what might be waiting for him.
But the world still seemed to be collapsing in on itself, and he knew it would all be gone from him in just a few seconds.
He didn’t even know his last name.
Why?""Think you’ve said enough for one meeting.
It looked like an experiment gone terribly wrong—something from a nightmare.
"It made Thomas sick to think people were hanging on to that hope of just one person dying; the more he thought about it, the less he believed it was true.
"You didn’t tell anyone, did you?
Though there had been no discernible change in the light since the sun and blue sky hadn’t appeared that morning, it still felt like a darkness spread over the Glade.
"Well," Zart began, his eyes darting around almost like he was waiting for someone else to tell him what to say.
Everyone knows he went nuts—some shank even accused you of killing him when you ran out there yesterday.
Why punish a guy for saving someone’s life?""So you do have an opinion—is that it?" Newt insisted, pencil in hand.
Thomas helped Newt distribute the weapons, and even more innovative ones were created in their desperation to be prepared for the Grievers.
The only other items in the room were eight trunks, just like the one containing the knives in the weapons basement.
" He nodded toward the concrete-blocked building into which the Runners had disappeared the night before.
Minho pulled several sheets from the trunk, the Maps from the last few days.
Wanna answer me that?"Thomas searched Chuck’s face for an answer, but by the looks of it he didn’t have one.
The twinkling red glow of the lights held an undercurrent of warning.
When everyone started talking at once, Thomas put his head in his hands to wait it out, terrified and awed at the same time.
"You kind of get used to it after a while.
A hollow moan filled the air, and then something that sounded like the clanking of chains.
"Thomas was shocked that the idea of entering the Maze again didn’t frighten him all that much.
"You’re telling me we have no chance?""None.
He blinked hard several times, trying to get the image of what he’d just seen in the shack out of his mind.
He had black hair, and when they made eye contact, the boy shook his head and turned away, walking toward a greasy iron pole with a wooden bench next to it.
Thomas jumped as a terrible crash sounded right outside their door, accompanied by screams and the splintering of wood, like some iron-jawed monster was eating the entire stairwell.
Sounds terrible, but I bet your mom is sitting in your room right now, holding your pillow, looking out at the world that stole you from her.
Though it was hard to make out from where he sat, there was something odd about the stone edges of the exits to the outside corridors.
The subjects will eventually recall and understand the purpose of the hard things we have done and plan to do to them.
Down a long corridor, then right again.
Then he turned and ran, maybe to tell someone else the exciting news.
"Thomas was slightly disappointed—he’d been expecting something more profound.
"Done asked four questions, haven’t ya?" Newt replied.
An echoing boom rumbled across the Glade as all four Doors sealed shut for the night.
Plus, we might have one thing going for us.
That’s a nice little part of their plan?"Thomas felt a moment of fear, worried that the Keepers might take out their anger on him for knowing so much.
He didn’t want to meet the source of those lights, those sounds.
Chuck and everyone else around the Glade never wanted to give him the answers to anything.
Thomas did, leaning forward until his nose touched the cool surface of the glass.
He argued that it was one of the things he always requested, that he used it for baking.
A twig snapped somewhere to his right and he jerked his head in that direction.
He grabbed one of the vines and wrapped it around Alby’s right arm.
Besides the fact that the Grievers were attacking every night, the Glade had basically shut down.
Just as the first Griever’s arm extended out to nip at them, Minho and Thomas dove in opposite directions, each toward one of the outer walls of the corridor.
""It’s been two years," Thomas said.
And how could this kid remember him?The bully snickered, a short burst of laughter mixed with a phlegm-filled snort.
A few grunts later and the girl’s lifeless body was dragged out, across the edge of the door and onto one of the stone blocks making up the ground of the Glade.
Nothing’s happening!"Cold filled Thomas’s veins as Teresa’s words sank in.
Once settled, he realized they were the Keepers, and to his chagrin that meant Gally was among them.
Even someone as cranky as Alby.
When Thomas asked why Newt and some others didn’t just go into the Maze and search for their friends, Newt’s expression had changed to outright horror—his cheeks had shrunk into his face, becoming sallow and dark.
"This slinthead comes up in the Box, acting all confused and scared.
The tension in the air was thick; Thomas couldn’t hear anyone breathing.
"You’d wanna hold on to one beauty of a rope.
Thomas refused to make eye contact with any of them, afraid of looking guilty.
Tonight, for trying to kill you.
She pointed ahead, and Thomas saw the narrow aisle forming in the middle of the corridor, Gladers fighting wildly to push the Grievers toward the walls.
That night, Newt and Alby gathered every last Glader at the East Door about a half hour before it closed, the first traces of twilight’s dimness creeping across the sky.
"How stupid is this—he saves Alby’s life, kills a couple of Grievers, and we’re sitting here yappin’ about what to do with him.
If you want to throw me in jail for trying to save someone’s life, then go ahead.
"What’s going on?"The dark-haired boy looked at him; his eyes flared for a moment, his head shaking slightly.
In the exact middle of the courtyard, the still-gaping hole of the Box lay open, as if inviting him to jump back in and go home.
She canhandle one night in there—if anything, she’ll be safer than us.
The spikes and the arms explained the creepy clicking sounds, metal against stone.
Thomas missed her desperately three seconds after she was gone.
A faint memory tried to escape the locked box within his mind—shadows on the walls when he was a kid, scaring him.
Thomas realized he’d given up on searching the walls and was just heading back toward the Glade in a depressed walk.
The poor guy had exhausted himself trying to start a conversation with Thomas, who’d refused to respond.
A group of boys milled around outside, glancing anxiously at the upper windows as if expecting a hideous beast to leap out in an explosion of glass and wood.
Teresa shone her light down on a steeply descending, slick black chute of metal.
Newt took out a key and opened it up, then motioned for Thomas to enter.
"We can fight ’em off.
He waited for a response, but none came.
"Thomas paused in the middle of chewing.
He liked Chuck, but trying to have an intelligent conversation with him was impossible.
"Bugger’s gone off and hid somewhere.
"Thomas squinted, confused by what Chuck had said.
"Okay, we get through tonight, somehow.
He punched his right fist against his other hand, even though he knew she couldn’t see him.
Shelves lined the walls, and there were several blocky wooden tables; everything in sight was covered with all manner of junk that gave him the creeps.
He screamed, called for help, pounded on the walls with his fists.
He didn’t want to get in any more trouble than he was already in—but he didn’t know how much longer he could last.
He wrapped his arms around the boy’s thighs and squeezed while Newt put a knee on one of Alby’s shoulders, then grabbed at Alby’s hands, still clasped around his own neck in a chokehold.
"Thomas almost broke his own advice—questions filled his mind.
He thought it was the last thing they should do.
Anything that could be done on such short notice to prepare for a Griever attack had been done: windows boarded up, furniture moved in front of doors, knives handed out as weapons …But none of that made Thomas feel safe.
I can only do what’s right.
On his next swing, the darkness prevented Thomas from seeing a new wall looming in front of him until it was too late; the corridor ended and turned to the right.
All of this—the Grievers, the walls moving, the Cliff—they’re just elements of a stupid test.
Thomas refused to talk to anyone the rest of the day.
He could see that where the front door had been there now stood a jagged hole leading out into the gray night.
After the F was an L, then an O, then an A, and a T.
Then C … A … T.
"Look," Thomas said, pointing down the line of stacks they’d formed, confused, but happy that the letters were so obvious.
When Chuck offered up that maybe they were just exploring and having some fun, Newt had given him a stare so harsh Thomas thought Chuck might spontaneously combust.
"So what do we do with her?" the taller one asked, his voice much higher pitched than Thomas expected.
He was stunned he hadn’t made the connection sooner.
The walls aren’t even moving anymore—it’s like this has all just been some stupid game and it’s time to end.
Thomas turned back to Newt, confused.
" He pointed again, this time right at Thomas’s chest.
Dark wallpaper covered the walls of the foyer and hallway, half of it peeling off.
More noises joined in a few seconds later, coming from all directions, the closest right outside their own window.
There was no sign of anything, to the left, right, down, up, or ahead, for as far as he could see.
"This is my guide for the night?
As soon as his feet hit the solid stone floor, he took off, running despite the scream of exhaustion from his body.
" Minho stood and stepped over to the trunk right behind them, knelt down, then lifted the lid and rested it against the wall.
Thomas could see several clumsily prepared wooden crosses poking through this growth, their horizontal pieces lashed to the upright ones with a splintery twine.
Thomas knew it was because they’d accomplished something never done before, but he was embarrassed by the attention.
You got that?"Thomas hesitated, then shook his head, confused.
Then came the crunching, grinding sound of stone against stone.
Finally the kid fell back; a sharp crack filled the air as another grave marker met its demise.
They meet right when they get back, before they forget anything.
"What did I do?" he whispered, not really meaning for anyone to hear him.
It lasted only an instant before vanishing into the abyss of his other captured memories.
"Thomas sighed, then got to his feet.
Thomas kicked out with his right leg, connecting with the arm attached to the claw.
Minho said it best on entering their new world: "I’ve been shucked and gone to heaven.
Tonight, they’d make their stand, once and for all.
Worst part, you’re always scared you might not make it back.
coa microwave, a dishwasher, a couple of tables.
theco shack to which Newt had gone.
The enormous stone wall to the right of them seemed to defy every known law of physics as it slid along the ground, throwing sparks and dust as it moved, rock against rock.
"You shouldn’t have done that, Minho.
He was clearly exhausted, almost in a daze.
See ya tonight.
"What about it?" Thomas looked at him, paused for effect.
That night dinner proved to be a somber affair, and it had nothing to do with the food.
It’s terrible, and some of us might die.
A line of icy cold shot across Thomas’s skin as he entered the Griever Hole, starting from his toes and continuing up his whole body, as if he’d jumped through a flat plane of freezing water.
The thick slabs of gray stone were cracked and covered in ivy, as ancient as anything Thomas could imagine.
This thought gave him a chill, made him wonder if a Griever might come charging toward them at any minute.
Between heaving breaths, he gasped, "I just saw … the dive move you did … back there … gave me an idea … we only have to last … a little while longer.
Thomas heard someone moving around inside.
No one made a move to stop him from doing as Gally asked, except for Chuck, who stood at the front door, shaking his head.
Wooden poles, metal spikes, large pieces of mesh—like what covers a chicken coop—rolls of barbed wire, saws, knives, swords.
co to lighten up the situation.
We’ll tell Newt and Alby about this tonight.
Then I just got used to it, I guess.
Give ’em one body that’s easy to find in the morning.
He pushed and swatted at his attacker, a relentless jumble of skin and bones cavorting on top of him as he tried to gain purchase.
He had to squeeze his hands to his ears every time he heard them.
"Probably right.
The beams of light from the creature shone all over the place, completely random, never settling in one spot.
"Half might’ve died, but half of us shucking lived.
You know that, right?""Judging by your little hiding spot, I’d say you’re not so normal yourself.
No one in Thomas’s room moved a muscle; he knew each of them was probably feeling guilty about their relief—that at least it wasn’t them.
I want to say my recommendation and be done with it.
No one said a word for a very long time.
"I’ll get you home!"Chuck turned and gave him a thumbs-up; his eyes glimmered with tears.
Every time he closed his eyes, the monstrous image of Ben leaping at him, the boy’s face set in lunacy, filled his mind.
""That’s not …," Alby began, then stopped with a frustrated sigh.
I tried to reach out and grasp a few, and that was one of them.
Not a good person to pick a fight with.
"Thomas almost laughed as Newt turned to an older boy standing nearby, whose face had turned bright red.
How could he do that!The noises grew louder.
What if the memories he’d had were false ones?
Thomas’s first instinct was to ignore her, to deny once again that someone had the ability to enter his mind, invade his privacy.
Everyone immediately ran forward, forming a packed crowd around her, a palpable excitement hovering in the air.
Newt blinked in surprise; someone coughed.
He believed it—he’d realized the massive scale when he’d been to the Cliff.
""I bet no one’s ever called him a dude before.
As he gaped, he saw, also, that everyone else had pulled themselves together into a group, taking in the new surroundings.
Thomas felt the last drop of hope drain from his body.
Newt’s head appeared at the little glassless window, looking through the bars, a smirk on his face.
For the next few hours, he and Minho scoured the ground, felt along the walls, climbed up the ivy in random spots.
It was something he’d wondered about, and he thought she was probably right.
Tomorrow morning, right after the wake-up.
Another couple of combinations made them realize that the second word was actually CATCH.
A loud crash from inside revealed that the trick had worked—and the litany of swearwords following it let them know Gally was none too happy about it.
Each step groaned and creaked under his weight; he might’ve stopped for fear of falling through the old wood if he weren’t leaving such an awkward situation below.
He squeezed past the connecting rods at the last second and stepped into the Maze.
A shiver ran up Thomas’s spine at the metallic scrape of the pole on the stone ground as Newt walked.
The anticipation of what might happen was overpowering, a suffocating blanket of misery and fear that began to take on a life of its own.
When they reached the final dead end and it was time to head back home, Thomas felt an almost uncontrollable urge to bag everything and stay there overnight, see what happened.
Good night, she said, just as the lights went out.
"I’m gonna break your faces!" he screamed, so loudly Thomas almost held his hands over his ears.
Whatever darkness awaited them, they’d be together, and that was all that mattered right then.
But right now we just gotta slim ourselves and get to the wake-up.
"I just did what anyone else would’ve done.
"Thomas, now slightly scared of the guy but mostly fed up with his attitude, moved to get up.
But Newt was up before anyone, waving his arms, then shushing the room by putting a finger to his lips.
"If anybody touches this girl," Alby said, "you’re gonna spend the night sleepin’ with the Grievers in the Maze.
He pulled up just short of the threshold of the Maze, his instincts forcing him to think twice about entering.
""Really clears things up.
" It was one word, barely there.
" Newt’s tone warned that the conversation about the Changing was over.
A skinny metallic rod burst out of the Griever’s moist skin, unfolding into a long appendage with three spinning blades, which moved directly toward Thomas’s face.
Couldn’t sleep last night.
Anything?"Minho actually recoiled at the harsh rebuke, but his face seemed more confused to Thomas than hurt or angry.
Beneath it, a keyboard was set into the wall, angling out enough for someone to type on it with ease if standing.
Finally, Newt stepped up to Alby and handed over the end of the pole he was holding.
"Are we messed up or what?"She smiled for the first time, and he almost had to look away, as if something that nice didn’t belong in such a glum and gray place, as if he had no right to look at her expression.
"No one said a word then.
The lights of the monster shone brightly, casting an eerie yellow glow across the stone of the open West Door, where the Griever exited into the depths of the Maze.
The roar of engines interspersed with rolling, cranking sounds like chains hoisting machinery in an old, grimy factory.
With a sudden jerk, Newt pushed himself back into an upright position, his face scrunched up in confusion.
He’d opened himself up, and he really liked Newt.
Seeing the appliances and the familiar layout made Thomas feel as if memories—real, solid memories—were right on the edge of his mind.
For some reason, hearing the word at that moment, from someone else, knocked something loose in his mind and it clicked.
His original estimate had been close—there were probably fifty to sixty of them, ranging from boys in their midteens to young adults like Alby, who seemed to be one of the oldest.
" Minho’s face reddened as he squeezed his hands together like he was choking someone.
The open sky in front of him was a deep purple, slowly fading into the bright blue of day, with tinges of orange from the sun on a distant, flat horizon.
Glum faces were everywhere throughout the Glade, and most of the workers had abandoned their daily jobs.
Once again, Thomas looked in awe at the massive moving wall—it defied any sense of physics.
"Thomas looked around, and surprisingly, astonishingly, no one seemed angry.
The tunnel began to twist, turning in a rough spiral, just enough to slow them down, and Thomas’s feet smacked right into Teresa, hitting her in the head; he recoiled and a feeling of complete misery sank over him.
"There was no they , just the one we thought was dead.
" "Weird?" Alby looked confused.
He just about got freaking torn apart three nights ago.
The only other furniture was a crooked wooden dresser and a small table, on top of which rested a lamp providing what light they had.
He realized that Chuck might actually be his only friend in the world.
The bladed arm moved within two feet, ready to slice his skin to bits.
"All right," the Keeper said, breathing heavier now.
The bed had gone to Newt.
The day had brightened considerably, the shadows stretching in the opposite direction from what Thomas had seen yesterday.
theco idea of those walls closing and trapping him inside this place they called the Glade was downright terrifying.
"So we have the Glade, surrounded by eight Sections, each one a completely self-contained square and unsolvable in the two years since we began this freaking game.
Alby’s whole body jerked a couple of times, his midsection thrusting up and away from the bed.
The frightening sounds of the Grievers grew closer by the second, echoing off the stone walls of the Maze.
Thomas was filled with a queasy fear, disbelief that this was happening at all.
Then he filled it with smaller boxes until it looked exactly like an enclosed tic- tac-toe board, three rows of three squares, all the same size.
Minho seemed to think nothing of it, throwing it to one of the other Runners, who went and put it back in the tool shed near the Gardens.
The distant wails of the Grievers grew closer as the night stretched on, every minute seeming to last longer than the one before it.
"No doubt this is right," she said.
"Won’t hurt ya unless you’re stupid enough to touch one of them.
Minho went to the Cliff with a group of Runners, taking ivy ropes and rocks to test the invisible Griever Hole one last time.
Thomas heard screams, saw blood, looked away, focused on the man who approached them.
Without hesitating, knowing the others would think he was trying to commit suicide, Thomas sprinted in their direction until he found himself in the middle of the pack of creatures.
How could he have done what he did out there after just a few days?
Thomas couldn’t help taking a peek—he saw a smear of bright red on one of the creatures’ bodies.
Thomas was glad the boy had asked the question for him.
"Go find some dinner—your terrible prison sentence of one day is over.
The one thing she chose to clasp on to?
The blade windmilled, its every turn visible to Thomas, as if the world had turned to slowiDocmti.
Alby told the Runners to hurry about their business—he wanted them back out in twenty minutes.
A surprising sense of calm eased his nerves; he let out a long sigh of relief.
A sadness washed over him, as if he missed her, wanted to see her.
Scrawled across the paper in thick black letters were five words: She ’s the last o ne .
co approaching an exit is the Cliff, and that ain’t a very good one unless you like falling to a horrible death.
"All right, writin’ her down," Newt said as he did just that, scribbling on a notepad.
"Minho was the one to speak up now.
"It’s got Dave!" someone yelled, the voice high-pitched with terror.
Each of the ones Thomas could see were very similar: a rough sketch of a square maze, filling almost the whole page.
As he sprinted for the Slammer on the back side of the Homestead, he watched as Gladers started moving inside, most of them with arms full of one thing or another.
Every Glader in the room sucked in a breath of surprise.
Leaning back against the thick trunk, he wished for a breeze but didn’t get one.
The Grievers were getting closer, and it was now obvious that there were more than one.
He couldn’t think of one person he knew, or recall a single conversation.
I think Minho’s farted three times in the last minute .
Another pause, this one longer.
Thomas had charged thirty or forty feet into the woods, dodging and ducking and losing ground with every second, when the beetle blade jumped onto a particularly large tree and scooted up its trunk.
Minho had thrown a large chunk, a piece that had fallen from one of the cracks in the wall.
For some reason everyone looked at Thomas; he shrugged in answer—he’d only remembered so much, and now he was just as clueless as anyone else.
Like the ceiling of a massive room.
"To begin, we better go see someone.
The growing darkness of twilight was a perfect fit for how grim things felt to Thomas.
The heavy metal door of the Map Room was slightly ajar, a wispy trail of black smoke drifting out and into the gray sky.
This time he jumped from the chair and scrambled as far from the bed as possible, knocking over the lamp on the table; it landed with the crash of broken glass.
Words were etched on the glass; Thomas could barely read them:Le t this half-shank b e a warning to all:You c an’t e sc ap e through the Box Hole .
She escaped by never taking her right hand off the walls of the maze, sliding it along as she walked.
Even though he was nervous and scared, he told Minho he could take one of the sections himself, but the Keeper refused.
Thomas followed, frustrated that they couldn’t take time to examine the walls, explore a little.
But no one answered his call.
But every buggin’ time, the Grievers leave the collar on our doorstep.
Directly in front of them, a row of twenty or so darkly tinged windows stretched across the compound horizontally, one after the other.
" Her condescending tone shocked Thomas.
He put his hands under his chin and stared at the foot of the bed, almost a shadow in the dim light.
Why do you call it the Changing?"Newt relaxed, seemed to shrink, even, and sighed.
" Thoughts of the girl crashed around his mind, made him remember the connection he felt.
It looked three or four stories high and about to fall down at any minute—a crazy assortment of logs and boards and thick twine and windows seemingly thrown together at random, the massive, ivy-strewn stone walls rising up behind it.
" Just after Thomas heard the grind and rumble of stone against stone announce the closing of the Doors for the day, Alby showed up to release him, which was a huge surprise.
The Grievers’ll kill you … one every night till it’s over….
"The Runners are out in the Maze, everyone’s working—maybe we’ll survive after all.
Refused to talk about it.
" He sighed.
Have you ever …" He paused, waiting for the interruption, but none came.
He pointed toward the doors of the Box.
Only the richest can be treated, no one can be cured.
His joy dribbled away, turned into a deep mourning for the twenty people who’d lost their lives.
"Every last one of ’em.
"Close the door!" Alby shouted, one final insult.
The idea made him nervous, and he looked around, as if someone might’ve heard his thoughts.
Zart was the tall, black-haired kid who’d stood at the front of the pole during Ben’s Banishment, and who for some odd reason smelled like sour milk.
The Maze walls, moving.
I think we’re leaving tonight.
He thought of the girl and the note saying she was the last one ever.
"And why do they have the word wicked written on their backs?""Never been able to catch one.
Thomas sprinted after the scurrying spy, and in a matter of seconds he entered the thick copse of trees and the world became dark.
It was followed by a horrible crunching, grinding sound.
Sparks flew from the stone as the massive right wall slid to the left, groaning thunderously as it made its journey to close off the Glade from the Maze for the night.
The brilliance of the sun should’ve awakened him—had done so easily since he’d arrived at the Glade.
""I thought the Grievers only came out at night.
If there was a code, it’s gone.
"Most of the guys who’ve gone through the Changing remember terrible things they won’t even talk about, which makes me doubt I have anything good back home.
Newt was right.
His eyes darted around the room, lit with a burning hatred.
Minho had pulled himself up and was standing once again, but he looked terrible, even in the pale light still available—sweaty, dirty, scratched-up.
Thomas thought of long fingernails tapping against glass.
Minho allowed a twenty-minute break and then they were back at it.
"They always compare each section’s Map to the one from the day before, and the day before that, and the day before that, day by day, each Runner just analyzing their own Section.
When they reached the crowd, they pulled Ben to his feet in front of Alby, their leader, where Ben hung his head, refusing to make eye contact with anyone.
"All I want is one normal day—one day to relax.
Thomas started to say something himself, but Alby had already made it to the monsters and jumped on top of one.
She gave a just-as-unpleasant glance toward Minho, then stopped to stand right next to Thomas.
But instinct told him he was right.
"Defend your proposal and be done with it.
He knew if there was anyone who would believe him, it would be Newt.
But tonight, the Gladers ate like dead men resurrected for one last meal before being sent to live with the devil.
The kid tried so hard to be everyone’s friend, but no one seemed to like him or even pay attention to him.
He couldn’t believe how quickly the light disappeared.
co as he’d done so far, but willed his mouth shut.
"Has anyone ever been caught outside the walls at night and lived through it?""Never.
The older boy had also mentioned burned earth and a disease.
With its walls that moved, every night, he finally understood why the Maze was so hard to solve.
The walls were closing.
It was hard for him to notice any changes from the day before, but Minho pointed out without thinking about it where the walls had moved.
Thomas ended up in the large living room on the bottom floor of the Homestead with the same people he’d slept with two nights before.
"Guess we’ll have to see what she does," Jeff said to no one in particular.
But then again, no one’s ever tried to tell us what they remembered during the Changing.
""No!" Gally yelled, making a couple of Keepers jump in their seats.
""But how do you know me?" He felt like the walls were spinning around him.
Eventually, when his watch showed that evening had arrived, he went to the Homestead with everyone else.
Thomas thought about what Gally, Ben and Alby had said about him—their suspicions that he was against them somehow, was someone not to trust.
Like I said, this passage is always in the same spot, but the route here might be a little different because of the walls rearranging themselves.
"Have a seat, I want you to get a couple of images in your head before we go out there.
He sprinted ahead, pulling Teresa behind him, Teresa pulling Chuck behind her, running at full speed, spears and knives cocked for battle, forward into the bloody, scream-filled hallway of stone.
""Sorry—if I’d known it was Gally, I never would’ve done it, I swear.
Was he different from everyone else somehow?
"You spent all bloody night out in the Maze—go take a nap.
If the sun’s really gone, won’t be long before plants and animals drop dead, too.
Thomas squeezed his eyes shut and was surprised to feel tears trickling down his cheeks.
From the Glade proper, the forest didn’t look that big, maybe a couple of acres.
"I don’t know if I can do this—stay in this jail all night.
Maybe whoever’s in charge realized you were nothing but a big mistake, sent someone to replace you.
The sun disappeared and the sky’s gone gray, they didn’t send us the weekly supplies—looks like things are going to end one way or another.
The beetle blades.
Chuck did the same, and they headed for the West Door, the one leading to theiDocClff.
They reached another set of glass doors and went through them into a massive downpour of rain, falling from a black sky.
The trees grew thicker and denser the farther back in the corner they went, more alive and full of leaves.
Their only chance for escape might be a death wish.
The walls haven’t moved, no exits, nothing.
The squeal of small engines followed by a grinding spin of metal.
He listened at his chest like Minho had done.
Next second gone.
He waited for Newt to answer, but nothing came.
Or, at the very least, Thomas hoped he could fight them off from high up, one by one, instead of being overwhelmed on the ground.
Thomas was so tired he wanted to lie down right there and take a nap.
Thomas sighed in frustration and leaned back against the tree.
"A beetle what?""Beetle blade," the boy said, pointing to the top of the tree.
He was so tired, his brain felt like someone had gone in and stapled it to his skull in a dozen places.
No wonder we have so many beetle blade spies running around this place.
Stay out there while the walls move.
"Thomas quickly scanned the faces of the Keepers, wondering one last time if he should say it, if they would understand.
He still wanted to be a Runner—which surprised him, considering what he’d just gone through out in the Maze—but becoming the Keeper right away sounded ridiculous.
"I’m not … I don’t even know what—"Ben screamed, a strangled gurgle of madness, and leaped into the air, slashing out with his blade.
He craned his neck to see the top of the walls far above; his mind spun with the odd sensation that he was looking down , not up.
From deep in the shaft came Alby’s voice shouting that they were ready, and Gally and a couple of others started pulling up on the rope.
He left Thomas standing there, now in his own daze.
He pointed the knife at the horde of Grievers; a flash glinted off the blade.
You don’t have the right to talk about things you don’t understand.
After years of searching, how did Minho and I find it this easily?Minho seemed to sense his thoughts.
The other Runners returned within the hour, and from what Thomas heard, none of them had found anything and they’d eventually given up as well.
Someone tugged on his sleeve, breaking him from his thoughts; Chuck had come back.
He squinted, willed his eyes to work in the growing darkness, wishing he had a flashlight.
"You know what, I don’t buggin’ care right now.
Fight through the middle, push the shuckin’ things toward the walls.
Minho hadn’t explained, but he had made it sound as if climbing the walls was impossible.
Deeper and deeper into the Maze they went, with only their thoughts and the sounds of their feet thumping against the hard stone floor.
Sadness filled him like a heavy poison.
Thomas wondered again about his inexplicable feeling of connection with her, though it had faded a little—but that could have been because of everything else occupying his thoughts.
"If you know something and ain’t tellin’ me …"Thomas was sick of being accused of knowing things.
The sounds—clashes, clangs, screams, moaning wails, roars of engines, spinning saws, snapping blades, the screech of spikes against the floor, hair-raising pleas for help—it all grew to a crescendo, became unbearable.
"Okay, somehow they wiped our memories—not just our childhood, but all the stuff leading up to entering the Maze.
You said the pattern’s basically been repeating itself for months—one more day won’t mean a thing.
"Everyone seemed too stunned to respond.
Once he reached a point a couple of feet above his friend, Thomas wrapped one of the vines around his own chest, around and around several times, snug against his armpits for support.
But Thomas rolled over and refusediDoct.
Thomas, relieved that Newt still hadn’t erupted into accusations, grabbed the one from the desk and placed it right next to where the girl’s head lay; he sat down, leaning forward to look at her face.
Then, again staring straight in his eyes, said, "I was one of the first Gladers, slinthead.
"Thomas was glad to have it.
"Well, for one, he has a lot more allies than I do.
He backed against the tree, trying to get away from Alby, who stayed right in his face.
"Thomas heard the creak of an old wooden door, and then Minho was dragging a cardboard box across the floor; the scrape of it sounded like a knife on bone.
Thomas blinked, then rubbed his eyes, like something out of a cartoon.
A multicolored flag hung limply at the top of the pole, no wind to reveal its pattern.
It was probably just an animal, maybe another beetle blade.
That weird note you had about being the last person to ever come here, your coma, the fact you can talk to me telepathically.
" Seeing the look of confusion on Minho’s face, he quickly explained what he’d done with the ropes of ivy.
The short one was already on the ground, kneeling beside the girl, feeling for her pulse and leaning over to listen to her heartbeat.
It grew louder by the second, and then a series of eerie clicks joined in.
After passing some pieces of chicken and a glass of water through the window, he took up his usual role of talking Thomas’s ear off.
Two older boys were pushing their way through the crowd—one was tall with a buzz cut, his nose the size of a fat lemon.
The jagged piece of stone fell.
He had someone else on his side.
"He’s awake!" the boy yelled to no one in particular.
"On they went, following the course of the Maze, sometimes turning right, sometimes turning left.
He said something about them killing us one a night until we were all dead—he said it at least twice.
The poor shanks who got stuck out in the Maze all night weren’t found until later—days later, sometimes, if at all.
At dinner Minho had told him an old story—one of the bizarre and random things he remembered from before—about a woman trapped in a maze.
"Making enemies was the last thing Thomas wanted, but still.
The screams of the other Gladers echoed off the tunnel walls as they slid down the oily chute.
Alby’d flipped once and for all, Thomas thought, fighting the urge to rid his stomach of its contents.
" They went through the West Door into Section Eight and made their way down several corridors, Thomas right beside Minho as he turned right and left without seeming to think about it, running all the while.
"I swear, Chuck," he whispered to no one.
A somber mood rested over the Glade, an easy thing to happen when all is gray.
cot make sure everyone knows about it so they don’t get any ideas.
" Thomas was having the hardest time figuring out if he liked Minho or not—his personality seemed to change every minute.
Thomas waited without breathing, braced himself for something horrible to come flying through the door.
Alby’s chest rose and fell with struggled breaths, but his skin was drenched in sweat; he looked like he wouldn’t last much longer.
They sat on the ground, leaning against the soft ivy as they ate lunch, neither one of them talking much.
"This place is called the Glade, all right?
It might actually be the safest place in the Glade.
Sending Teresa here and shutting everything down was only the last part, one more … final analysis.
"I want to be one of those guys that goes out there," he said aloud, not knowing if Chuck was still awake.
The Changing had been aptly named, considering what it had done to him.
Jittery and nervous, Thomas picked up one page from each pile, making sure they were all from the same day, keeping them in order.
"Voices erupted from every direction, and it took Newt half a minute to calm everyone down.
"And then he was gone.
He was surprised at how readily everyone agreed that it was time to do some more in-depth exploring of the Maze and stay out there overnight.
A shadow crossed the light; then the window slid open.
"The vines—can’t we climb them?"Minho let out a frustrated sigh.
Thomas could picture it all: the creature’s metal spikes digging into the wooden sides of the Homestead, the massive creature rolling its body, climbing up toward their room, defying gravity with its strength.
Even more honest—we don’t know what we’re looking for.
Without a word, the driver kept his foot on the gas and the bus plowed forward, driving off into the rain-swept night.
He paused, thought of that night when Chuck had scared the crap out of Gally in the bathroom.
How long had they been there?Try as he might to avoid it, his mind still kept wandering back to the image of the vicious Griever.
The crunching sound rattled his bones.
If I gotta be honest, we haven’t figured out jack yet.
Thomas had a strong feeling it wasn’t a way out of their nightmare; he just hoped it didn’t lead to another pack of Grievers.
Thomas took hold of the one attached to Alby’s left leg, and pulled.
At first, a shot of panic raced through him; he stepped back, worried it might be a Griever.
Horror grew in his heart.
The crunching, grinding sound of the Doors filled the air, deafening.
A man walked up to the Gladers as the others in his group spread out around them, sweeping their guns left and right as they shot at the observation windows, shattering them.
’ What did you mean?"She shook her head slightly.
The south wall eventually moved, closing for the night; he leaned forward until it stopped.
"Just be glad you ain’t goin’ with her, Thomas," Alby said; he gave both of them one last glare before leaving.
When the last one finally fell over the Cliff, I broke down and sobbed till my throat and chest hurt.
"He paused, looking at each person in the room.
She was right next to him, but his eyes stayed glued up ahead.
Everyone started talking at once; Thomas only caught pieces here and there.
The Griever Hole would’ve been pitch-black if not for the beam of Teresa’s flashlight cutting through the darkness.
Thomas leaned in to get a better look and saw that Minho had drawn a big box that filled almost the entire page.
After two years of being treated like mice, tonight we’re making a stand.
"Thomas put his marker down, then flexed his fingers, hoping he’d been right about all this.
Thomas stared, overcome with curiosity—he’d yet to see a Runner up close or talk to one.
Alby’s eyelids fluttered briefly as he continued; he looked like he could think of a thousand things he’d rather be doing right then.
Things for him to think about as he went to sleep that night.
"You’ll spend the next two weeks working one day apiece for our different job Keepers—until we know what you’re best at.
Three Grievers were up ahead, rolling along as they dug their spikes into the stone, coming directly toward him.
The walls were made of wood, as was the floor, and it didn’t look like anyone had ever attempted to make the place look inviting.
"Only a couple of us know about it.
"Go!" one of the rescuers—that was the only way Thomas could think of them—screamed from behind.
A mechanized surge of machinery sounded from outside, followed by the familiar rolling clicks of a Griever on the stony ground, as if someone had scattered a handful of nails.
And then it was time for another sleepless night.
And maybe you weren’t supposed to compare one day to the next, but look at it one day at a time?"Newt laughed.
He wrote the word GLADE in the middle, then numbered the outside squares from one to eight, starting in the upper left corner and going clockwise.
"Though I guess a Griever can’t squeeze through this window, so I’ll be happy, right?"The mention of Grievers surprised him—he didn’t remember talking about them to her yet.
Seeing all these Grievers close up hit home with an explosion of reality—could they really fight them all?A long moment passed before Alby replied.
"Thomas felt like someone had just rammed their fist in his abdomen.
" Minho looked back into the Maze, which was now almost completely dark with nighttime.
Chuck was too short for his eyes to reach where Thomas could see them as he spoke, but from his next statement, Thomas imagined them filling with a bleak sadness, maybe even tears.
A straight line of light appeared across the ceiling of the room, and Thomas watched as it expanded.
Just be glad Frypan isn’t around—he hates it when we raid his fridge.
The air around him had a greenish, muted hue, as if only several minutes of twilight remained in the day.
"You said something to me—in my head—right before you found me over here.
" Destiny or not, Thomas didn’t want to run into one of those things.
You’re right, Tommy—I shouldn’t be so mean to Newbies.
Minho reached down and patted his backpack, where his notes rested.
"And believe me, you or nobody else has the slightest clue what it’s like to be out there.
Two more Keepers spoke, one for Frypan’s idea, one for Winston’s.
"No wonder we missed it," Minho said, furiously writing down notes and dimensions, his best attempt at a diagram.
"Tommy, I might not be the sharpest guy in the Glade, but sounds like you’re talkin’ straight out your butt to me.
Thomas watched as Alby unbuttoned the collar, then wrapped it around Ben’s neck; Ben finally looked up just as the loop of leather snapped closed with a loud pop.
Shuckin’ walls move out there at night just as much as these here doors.
Newt waited a full minute before he slowly let go of Alby’s hands.
"We’ll fight ’em if we have to, make a path to the Cliff for you and Teresa.
That maybe they were safe for one more night.
"Go ahead, last but not least.
An onrushing sense of claustrophobia stifled him, compressed his lungs, as if water filled their cavities.
It was as if a supernatural wind had swept through the place and sucked out all sound.
He turned and almost screamed out loud— a beetle blade was only a few inches from him, its spindly legs poking through the ivy and somehow sticking to the stone.
"We’ve been bustin’ our butts for two years, and all you can ask is why we’re too sissy to stay out there all night?
Thomas sucked in two huge breaths and leaned in once again.
" Thomas tapped his right temple.
canco hope that a lot of the Grievers might be out and about in the Maze—not in that Hole of theirs.
"That right there’s the number one supply we get," Minho announced.
It’s centered mainly around what they used to call the equator—it’s just heat and dust now, filled with savages consumed by the Flare beyond help.
Neatly stacked piles of paper and pencils lay about the table’s surface, one for each chair.
When we’re done,iDocIthink.
" Minho glanced over at one of the trunks.
All the while, his eyes stayed riveted on the beetle blade scuttling across the forest floor.
They grew louder, closer—the other boys had shuffled across the room and as far away from the window as possible.
The blankets someone had left for him the night before still lay there.
And he certainly agreed—he’d much rather come home safe and sound to the Glade every night than ensure another battle with the Grievers.
Every flashlight in the compound was gathered and distributed to as many people as possible; Newt said he planned for everyone to sleep in the Homestead that night, and that they’d kill the lights, except for emergencies.
The sounds echoing off the walls were a cacophony of terror—human screams, metal clashing against metal, motors roaring, the haunted shrieks of the Grievers, saws spinning, claws clasping, boys yelling for help.
Everyone else chimed in their approval, filling Thomas with relief and a sense of pride.
He couldn’t fight off the image that they’d been swallowed by some gigantic beast and were sliding down its long esophagus, about to land in its stomach at any second.
"This leads from Section Eight—the middle left square—to Section One—the top left square.
"Whoa is right," Thomas said.
Am I doing this thing right?
If Newt and the others hadn’t been able to solve the Maze after two years of searching, it seemed impossible there could actually be a solution.
"What do they do when they get back every night?
theco one-person-a-night thing was true now.
The sight of it immediately brought back the memory of Ben getting shot by Alby in the Deadheads.
"Being a Runner was the last thing on Thomas’s mind.
You still sick?"Alby’s next words came out in a wheeze, as if every one of them would take a week off his life.
It was the section of pole with the leather collar attached to it.
But one after the other, they rolled down the stone hallway, clicking and moaning and ready to kill.
How much you wanna bet when we get back we find out a Griever took one of them just like last night?
Just before the normal Door-closing time, Frypan prepared one last meal to carry them through the night.
"I didn’t think it mattered anymore—if you haven’t figured out the Maps by now …"Minho looked disgusted, the pale light and fog of smoke making his face seem almost sinister.
Seems fine—and Newt’s glad he doesn’t have to be the big boss anymore.
"All right, talk," Minho said.
It paused by the closed Door that led into the Glade, only a few yards to Thomas’s right.
He wondered if it’d just be easier to turn and fight, get it over with.
Anyone tell you that?"Thomas ignored the question and moved on, determined to get as many answers as possible.
When he was finished, he grabbed something odd-shaped on one of the ends and dragged the whole thing along toward the group.
Thomas was at the back, Teresa right in front of him.
He stepped on someone’s hand, earning a sharp cry of pain in return, then a punch on the calf.
"He paused, but Thomas said nothing, dreading the lecture he knew was coming.
It was as if someone had stolen his five senses, leaving him in a vacuum.
A horrible smell filled his nostrils, like eggs and milk gone rotten.
If you do, I’ll break your shuck neck, right after I’m done with your arms and legs.
He wiped the tears from his cheeks, rubbed his eyes, thinking he should be embarrassed but not feeling that way.
" Thomas was just glad he’d gotten that much of a concession.
No one said much, the mood somber and grim.
Several men and women dressed in grimy jeans and soaking-wet coats burst through the entrance with guns raised, yelling and screaming words over each other.
Thomas was relieved to hear he wasn’t the only one.
Teresa and I were sent here just like anyone else, and we can die just as easily.
" Thomas paused, upset and suddenly embarrassed.
The latest one said it was day number 749.
A couple of boys cried in a corner.
"Gally was right on that count—stupid idea.
cof the coma all sorts of thoughts and memories swirled through my head like crazy, almost as if I could feel someone emptying my mind, sucking them out.
And I was the veteran—the one with all the experience and knowledge.
The only thing interesting was another one of those odd signs that read World In Catastrophe—Killzone Experiment Department.
Then he took another vine and put it around Alby’s left arm, then both of his legs, tying each one tightly.
"Yeah, jacked up is right.
His feet ached from pressing into the stone cracks.
"He’s never been the same since being stung— must’ve been one bugger of a memory.
Thomas turned to his right to see a kid standing nearby, short and pudgy, staring at him.
Test everybody to see how fast they are?"Newt gave Thomas a disgusted look, then groaned.
Not once did he falter on his return, turning left and right and running down long corridors in reverse of the way he had come.
Using the same method of pushing each of Alby’s arms and legs up two or three feet at a time, Thomas slowly made his way up the stone wall.
"Thomas looked around one more time, the feel of the place completely different now that all the walls were solid with no way out.
"Burn me—you grew some right nice-sized eggs over night, now didn’t ya?"Thomas ignored him and moved on.
But in truth, he was psyching himself up for what he had planned for that evening, convincing himself it was the right thing to do.
Just after dark, Chuck brought him some dinner and a big glass of cold water.
Gally yanked the door open and stepped out into the hall, but before anyone could react, he popped his head back in the room.
Plus, I wouldn’t touch one if you gave me a free trip out of this place.
Anyone who goes through it acts like a bloody psycho when it’s over—although usually not as bad as poor Ben.
Chuck was pointing at a spot near the floor, right underneath the screen and keyboard.
No one dared admit they couldn’t wait to see the girl, but Thomas assumed they were all just as curious as he was.
And it was obvious from the other Gladers’ reactions that none of them had figured this out until now.
""Yeah, right.
"	 For a long moment, no one said anything, and all Thomas saw were blank faces.
On all four sides of the Glade, only the right walls were moving, toward the left, closing the gap of the Doors.
Teresa was by his feet, squeezing his right ankle with her hand.
Surprisingly, despite the dead light and everything falling apart, the day in the Glade appeared to be proceeding business as usual—farming, gardening, cleaning.
"Because no one’s ever made it …"He trailed off, and Thomas knew what he was thinking.
Plus, there’s still enough light to see by, as faint as it is.
He fell to his knees by one of the scraggly trees on the outskirts of the forest and threw up, retching as he coughed and spat out every last morsel of the acidic, nasty bile from his stomach.
"Ready!" Minho yelled next to Thomas, raising his barbwire-wrapped club into the air with one hand, a long silver knife in the other.
Twilight had fallen, and the mammoth walls looked like enormous tombstones in a weed-infested cemetery for giants.
Exhaustion consuming him, his mind wandered to his short time in the Maze, his time as a Runner and how much he’d wanted it—ever since that first night in the Glade.
"And Minho said they think there’s a pattern, right?""Right.
He’s the big one that stood in front last night.
One by one, boys were stepping out of the crowd and walking over to the long pole; they grabbed it with both hands, gripped it as if readying for a tug -of-war match.
They’re gonna kill you, all of you— one by one!"Screaming the last word, Gally threw his body toward the window and started tearing at the wooden boards like a wild animal trying to escape a cage.
The frustration at getting no answers from anyone was starting to grind his nerves.
They’d think he’d really gone bonkers, maybe even lock him up—and for good this time.
He’d grown used to running the Maze, but this was completely different.
Not surprisingly, Chuck was right behind him.
When’s the last time I had a hot dog?
The sky, every last inch of it, was slate gray.
In truth, as Thomas silently watched the commotion, he didn’t feel nearly as panicked or frightened as his instincts told him he ought to be.
A few had bright lights attached to them.
And those are the ones who got the Serum and went through the Changing.
she said, then was gone.
Just as the first sounds of boys crashing into Grievers filled the air—pierced with screams and roars of machinery and wood clacking against steel—Chuck ran past Thomas, who quickly reached out and grabbed his arm.
"A couple of boys grabbed some ropes made from ivy vines and lowered Alby and Newt into the Box so they could retrieve the girl’s body.
An exhaustion he’d not known possible filled every tiny particle of his body.
Thomas stepped up, hesitantly, to the closest one and knelt down to get a look.
Thomas, a little shocked at the last statement, left the Homestead and walked to an old bench near the Box and took a seat, his mind a whirlwind.
Not everyone here could be a jerk.
Minho crept ahead and peeked around the sharp edge of stone, looking toward the Cliff.
With everyone’s thoughts on the stranger waking up from her coma, it proved easy.
He held one hand carefully over the area where he’d been bitten; the other clutched his stomach as if that would prevent what Thomas now felt was an inevitable barf.
She stopped several feet in front of the Gladers and slowly looked left to right, taking them all in.
"You saw the chick, right?
The odds of everyone surviving were slim.
The clicking of spikes against the hard stone.
Thomas was horrified by the whole affair—he couldn’t help feeling responsible even though he’d never done anything to provoke Ben.
Almost like toys abandoned in the woods for years, recently discovered by the next generation of kids ready to play war.
When he rounded the next corner, he skidded to a halt at the sight in front of him.
Thomas had just moved his attention to the four vast openings in the middle of the main walls of the Glade when Chuck arrived, a couple of sandwiches cradled in his arms, along with apples and two metal cups of water.
Tonight, they’d fight.
But he kept telling her he didn’t feel good, that he just wanted to be alone and sleep in his spot behind the forest, maybe spend some time thinking.
I’ve seen the sucker’s bones.
I asked for freaking Thomas!"Newt looked up, questioned Thomas with a raising of his eyebrows.
Despite everything, he felt a shiver of excitement; he was sure they could avoid getting trapped out there at night again.
"Thomas turned away to stare into the forest where the sick boy had attacked him just the night before.
But those thoughts just led back to the hopelessness that had filled him so many times already.
Images of people flashed across his mind, but there was no recognition, their faces replaced with haunted smears of color.
It was a big block of roughly cut concrete, with one tiny, barred window and a wooden door that was locked with a menacing rusty metal latch, like something out of the Dark Ages.
co Minho and Newt were right.
" He continued to eat, munching on the apples as he studied the huge breaks in the walls.
He focused on the bus, on Teresa, on escape.
Several randomly placed mechanical arms stuck out here and there, each one with a different purpose.
Finally, after the longest hour of Thomas’s life, they reached the long alley that led to the last turn before the Cliff—a short corridor to the right that branched off like the stem of the letter T.
Thomas, his heart thumping, sweat slicking his skin, had moved up right behind Minho, Teresa at his side.
Going out there at night is beggin’ for death.
The beetle blade had already revealed his exact position.
He sat in the chair to the right of Alby’s empty seat.
"He winced and shook his head, hoping now that no one was there.
I don’t care what happens, no one’s gonna touch this girl.
"Can’t the bloody Med-jacks handle that boy for ten minutes without needin’ my help?" He shook his head and lightly kicked Thomas on the foot.
Good that?" He waited for a nod of consent from Thomas—who gave it reluctantly—then pointed to the kid in the chair on the far right.
Except for one thing.
" Thomas just couldn’t handle it right then.
Thomas kept a steady pace as he ran with the other Gladers along the stone pathways toward the Cliff.
Chuck’s pudgy face was there, staring with frightened eyes.
Thomas had never wanted so badly to punch someone.
One way or another, there was going to be a fight.
On the right side of the Door, foot-long rods jutted out from the wall edge, also several inches in diameter, in the same pattern as the holes facing them on the other side.
The absolute best-case scenario was that only one of them would die—but even that couldn’t be trusted.
"The other Keepers burst out in argument, everyone talking over everyone else.
She looked like she could be fifteen or sixteen years old, and her hair was tar black.
Newt and Alby were gathering the Gladers, telling everyone it was time to go.
We made it through the whole night—never been done before.
There was the Cliff, opening out into a gray-dark sky, about twenty feet away.
The others in the room were still; no one made a sound.
"I’m Thomas—been here just a couple of days.
"Most of the words were self-explanatory, but Thomas wondered about a couple of them.
"Why is everyone calling me Greenbean?" he asked, shaking Chuck’s hand quickly, then letting go.
It looked as if Ben had recovered only slightly since Thomas had seen him in the Homestead.
It was a strange and unsettling sight, like he was standing at the edge of the universe, and for a brief moment he was overcome by vertigo, his knees weakening before he steadied himself.
Still dazzled by the light, he staggered a bit.
Then she spoke one sentence—her voice hollow and haunted, but clear.
What would that mean?"You’re sure?" Newt prodded, standing right behind Alby.
I want the whole story when they’re done and you’re rested up.
theco one chasing me?"Minho looked over at him, a blank expression on his face.
"Don’t waste your energy!"Thomas felt someone examining his arms and legs, ripping his clothes away from his body, checking for damage.
Well, no one except Newt.
" He paused and looked down at his hands, rubbing them together.
At least most of us will make it through—just leaves one poor sucker to die.
"You said they’d turn off when you punched in the code!"Both Grievers had righted themselves and extended their spikes, had started moving toward them.
""That stupid girl is the last thing I’m worried about.
Like a book completely intact but missing one word in every dozen, making it a miserable and confusing read.
They stay in the same spot, but the route there changes with the wall movements every night.
"Greenie, you get him, right?" He nodded again.
"Thomas’s anger lessened slightly at that, turned into pity.
Still, Thomas was glad to have him around.
Ain’t none been here longer.
"Gally?" Thomas asked, trying to suppress the complete hatred he had for him.
"We figured out the walls were moving right at the beginning.
"Well, no one said I couldn’t look around.
Thomas guessed it was about two in the morning when he turned from his back to his stomach for the millionth time that night.
Thomas pulled up short, readying himself for a fight.
"If you’re right.
If he expected the other boys to be honest, he should be honest too.
Filled with terror at what the consequences might be.
Three black words were printed there, so obvious he couldn’t believe he’d missed it earlier.
Chuck nudged Thomas with his elbow and the boys resumed their walk to the edge of the crowd, then waited in silence; any questions Thomas had were forgotten.
Two or three were missing, and not a single one approached anything close to the color white.
How many Grievers’ll come at us?" He peered down the corridor that led deeper into the Maze, as if expecting the creatures to arrive then, summoned by the sound of their name.
"Well, everyone’s speculating they can only kill one of us.
If someone’s going to die every night anyway, we might as well use it to our advantage.
Several feet down the tunnel, she had aimed her light at a small square of grimy glass that shone a dull green color.
He’d go down fighting.
The Griever had come right through the house and was now leaving.
A wooden table stood in the exact center, eight chairs tucked in around it.
World In Catastrophe: Killzone Experiment Department.
The metal one with words stamped on it?" Thomas’s heart had started to race with excitement.
co across the torso of both beetle blades—WICKED—ran through his thoughts again and again.
Something ain’t right, and until we figure it out, I officially recommend that we lock his butt in the SlammeriDoc—for.
Hanging out, in the middle of thin air, were ivy vines stretching to nowhere.
She takes the food, seems to be doing all right.
The woman pulled back enough for siDocmeone’s.
No one in the room moved a muscle as they watched, obviously too stunned to do anything.
In other words, the sun that had shone down on these people for two years, providing heat and life to everything, was not the sun at all.
Two days, two Greenies, one alive, one dead.
" "Which Keeper he gonna get?" someone shouted from the back of the crowd.
" He sat back down and pulled his legs up, much like she had done.
Then, seconds later, several other monsters followed close behind their companion, whirring and clicking as if celebrating their victory.
"What’s goin’ on here, Greenie?"Thomas stared back, confused, his face turning bright red, his gut clenching.
"Newt nodded, already on the move toward a small tool shed used for the Gardens; he’d clearly been waiting for the order.
But plenty of people had told him what it’s like in the Maze, especially at night.
Teresa crinkled her forehead in confusion for a second, but then a light seemed to blink on behind her eyes.
You wanna spend another night out there?
"Thomas looked at her, threw all his compressed hatred into the glare.
co flashlight to reveal her features—pale, wrinkly skin covered in horrible sores, oozing with pus.
They send new ones in the Box every so often.
We’re making progress—found a couple more words already.
For the second night in a row, Thomas went to bed with the haunted image of Ben’s face burned into his mind, tormenting him.
The early-morning light had a sharp sheen about it, making everything look bright and crisp—the ivy, the cracked walls, the stone blocks of the ground.
He focused in on Chuck, groaned.
Thomas thought he saw a couple of red flashes to his left.
"Man," Minho said, summing up Thomas’s feelings with one word.
He was still there, and in one piece, but there was no sign of movement.
He reached down and grabbed one of the vines that went all the way to the ground and wrapped his hand around it.
Real parents?"Thomas laughed, mostly to push away the sudden surge of sadness the statement caused.
He ambled up to Thomas slowly and stopped right in front of him.
Dozens of yards had become dozens of feet, and the monsters were only seconds away from crashing into the waiting biDocys.
.
co "Ready," Minho said steadily.
Every step he took seemed like it could be his last.
"I didn’t see anything move that night we got stuck out there.
Thomas was confused.
It shocked him when he realized he’d been running for almost an hour—the shadows of the walls ran long toward the east, and soon the sun would set for the night and the Doors would close.
He watched as the right wall reached the end of its journey, its connecting rods finding their mark and entering without a glitch.
I, for one, am encouraged.
Well, neither Minho nor anyone else actually saw him do anything in the vines.
When everyone was settled, Thomas found himself upstairs with Newt, Alby and Minho, and they were finally able to finish their discussion from earlier in the courtyard.
Now it was confirmed: the red light from its eye cast a creepy glow on six capital letters smeared across the torso, as if they had been written with blood:WICKEDThomas couldn’t imagine why that one word would be stamped on the beetle blade, unless for the purpose of announcing to the Gladers that it was evil.
The woman and other rescuers shuffled the nineteen boys and one girl through the front door and up a flight of stairs, then into a huge dormitory with a series of bunk beds lined up along one of the walls.
"The Grievers will kill you all— one every night till it’s over!"Thomas watched, speechless, as Gally staggered to his feet and walked forward, dragging his right leg with a heavy limp.
"And before he could change his mind, he slipped away, heading around the corner toward the front door of the Homestead, just as the last couple of Gladers were entering, Newt shooing them in like errant chickens.
Ironically, the feeling that things would be okay made him slightly uneasy.
I figured there was a door that swung shut or a little mini-wall that slid out of the big one.
Gotta be a decision maker, know the right amount of risk to take.
"Well, those are just the ones we found.
"Thomas wondered what lay under the doors when the Box wasn’t there, but held his tongue.
"You can forget that little thought right now.
" Thomas was eager to do so, but was also scared to death it might end up being nothing.
But despite that, despite everything, despite all the woman on the bus had told them about the world they’d reentered, Thomas felt safe for the very first time since coming out of the Box.
You haven’t done anything wrong .
Thomas did, reciting every word he’d told the Keepers, hating how Teresa’s eyes filled with worry—and terror.
Newt finally calmed everyone down again, but Gally wasn’t finished.
whirrrrrrrrrrrrrrrclick-click-clickIt came to a stop, then rolled once more, right up to the wall.
In the Glade, Chuck had become a symbol for him—a beacon that somehow they could make everything right again in the world.
"At least it won’t get completely dark—looks like we’re stuck with this twilight junk twenty-four hours a day now.
Despite the poor light, Thomas realized who it was immediately.
"Newt, get in here!"The door was flung open before he’d finished his last sentence.
"Every single one of us was taken when we were really young.
He felt the gales then, sucking into the cyclone so that it blew past him from behind, ripping at his clothes and hair like they were shredded flags caught in a storm.
""The code?" Frypan repeated, his voice lighting up with a trace of hope.
Hours later, deep in the night, Thomas was still the only one awake.
Until he thought about what had caused it …"What’s your name?" Chuck asked from behind, running to catch up.
"Too bad it smells like an abandoned copper mine.
Across from that on the other side stood large glass doors, although the lighting made it impossible to see what was on the other side.
But until then, we’ll fight WICKED and stop the experiments and tests.
Ben screamed then, without pause, a sound so piercing that Thomas covered his ears.
Despite the alternative, despite knowing that if they hadn’t tried to escape, all of them might’ve died, it still hurt, even though he hadn’t known them very well.
" If it hadn’t been for the whole Ben-in-the- graveyard incident, Thomas was sure she would’ve been all he’d thought about last night.
Thomas turned to see who’d opened the door, expecting a frightened Chuck or maybe a reconsidering Alby.
A thick silence followed the thunderous rumble of the Door closing, and a veil of darkness seemed to cover the sky, as if even the sun had been frightened away by what lurked in the Maze.
He did as well; his heart quickened when he saw that one of the doors was swinging open toward them.
He thought about what Teresa had said to him, too, the very first time—that he and she had somehow done all of this to them.
He thought back to those brief moments when she’d opened her eyes right after being pulled out of the Box.
"Get me some water!"Alby looked over at Thomas, who was shocked to see the slightest hint of a smile flash across his face before vanishing in a scowl.
"This is bloody nuts, you know that, right?" His face was impossible to read, but there seemed to be a hint of victory in his eyes.
Almost every person had a flashlight by their side in case of emergency.
"You’re hiding something," he finally replied, finishing off his last bite and taking a long swig of water.
For some reason, his thoughts turned back to the day Minho and Alby had gone to look at the dead Griever—when everything had gone to klunk.
A few minutes passed before Thomas saw the first glimmer of light shine off the Maze walls up ahead.
Thomas was so terrified, he barely registered that everyone else in the room had fled to the hallway—all except Newt, who lay unconscious on the bed.
"Minho’s right.
They tiptoed until they came upon a small, dusty window, a soft beam of light shining through onto the stone and ivy.
"Every last one of those suckers.
"Yes, Winston, I’m glad you’re so good at paying attention.
His mind functioned without flaw, trying to calculate his surroundings and predicament.
But based on how many of us died getting here, I wouldn’t like to be one of them right now.
"So?" Newt replied, his jaw dropping slightly.
For you to say anything …"Minho paused, rubbing his eyes, groaning in frustration.
The icy fear and panic Thomas had experienced so often the last few days swept over him once again in full force.
"Minho squinted slightly, as if he was studying Thomas.
He couldn’t have been more than sixteen years old, but he had a full beard and hair sticking out all over the rest of his body, as if each follicle were trying to escape the confines of his food-smeared clothes.
When Newt finally had everyone gathered, he called for quiet, and Thomas turned to hear what he had to say.
Then the clicking of its spikes against the stone suddenly turned into a deeper, hollower sound.
The sounds of his pursuer went on relentlessly, only now with the bone- shuddering addition of cracking and splitting rock joined in.
Everything inside him churned and hurt; the tears that had yet to come burned his eyes.
For some reason, he’d never really considered the possibility that the girl might wake up and be okay.
But the combined strength of the Keepers was way too much, forcing the condemned boy closer and closer to the edge of the Glade, just as the right wall was almost there.
" Her grin turned into a smirk.
The Runners’ll be back soon; then those big walls are going to move until the gaps are closed.
A large grove of trees filled the final corner; the closest ones looked crippled and close to dying.
Think about that while ya sit here and stare at the bloody walls.
He lay on the floor in one of the upper rooms, on top of a thick blanket, several other Gladers crammed in there with him, almost body to body.
Then a thin shadow interrupted the light, moving back and forth.
Returning to the table, Thomas found that Minho had cut twenty sheets already, making a messy pile to his right as he threw each new piece on top.
"You should go entertain the GriDocevers.
"Who said Clint had first shot at her?" someone yelled from the crowd.
He stayed frozen, rooted to the spot as all grew silent, except for the whistling song of a few birds in the distance.
Everyone quieted, and for the first time, Thomas noted the grinds and rattles of the rising lift, reminding him of his own nightmarish trip the day before.
Time slowed to an agonizing crawl; he felt as if the next day might never come.
"Hold on!" Alby yelled, silencing everyone.
