They tiptoed until they came upon a small, dusty window, a soft beam of light shining through onto the stone and ivy.
We’re gonna fight our way through to the Griever Hole, and Tommy here’s gonna punch in his little magic code and then we’re gonna get payback on the Creators.
And as the time passed, Thomas let the slightest trickle of hope enter his system—maybe they’d make it before getting attacked.
Thomas turned to see who’d opened the door, expecting a frightened Chuck or maybe a reconsidering Alby.
Almost every person had a flashlight by their side in case of emergency.
Every time it stopped, the metal arms unfolded and turned this way and that, like a roving robot on an alien planet looking for signs of life.
We’ve sworn our lives to fighting WICKED.
Swinging his spear wildly, he jumped on top of the creature’s bulbous body, whacking two metal arms away from him with a loud crack.
He barely noticed he’d been hungry until he started eating Frypan’s hastily prepared meal of biscuits and tomato soup.And then it was time for another sleepless night.The Builders had boarded up the gaping holes left by the monsters who’d carried off Gally and Adam.
You might be a shuck-faced slinthead, but you ain’t evil.” Alby showed the slightest hint of a smile, a bare crack in his usually hard face.
The slightest glow of early morning illuminated the Glade, turning everything dark blue and shadowed.
What if, instead, you were supposed to compare the eight sections to each other, every day?
An odd, dilapidated wooden building near one of the corners of the square contrasted greatly with the gray stone.
“Don’t die—fight it.
For the first time, he felt a hunger to get revenge on the people responsible for sending him there.But those thoughts just led back to the hopelessness that had filled him so many times already.
Glimmers of an eerie light shone through the window; it cast a wavering spectrum of colors on Newt’s body and face, as if he stood next to a lighted swimming pool.
He remembered the odd lights he’d observed through the Glade window with Newt.
Might as well fight the Grievers rather than sit around letting them pick us off one by one.” He held up a finger.
The boys decided to take their lunches to eat outside, and a few minutes later they found themselves at the west wall, looking out at the many work activities going on throughout the Glade, their backs up against a spot of thick ivy.
It looked three or four stories high and about to fall down at any minute—a crazy assortment of logs and boards and thick twine and windows seemingly thrown together at random, the massive, ivy-strewn stone walls rising up behind it.
A thick bed of leaves and fallen twigs crunched underneath him.
Alby’s whole body jerked a couple of times, his midsection thrusting up and away from the bed.
He had dark hair, his face young but full of wrinkles around the eyes, as if he’d spent each day of his life worrying abouthow to make it to the next.
He realized immediately he’d just made a mistake—he couldn’t let this guy think he could talk to him like that.He pushed himself back up onto his knees so he was looking down at the older boy.
Minho spotted a Griever disappearing around a corner ahead of them; and it didn’t come back.
It looked as if Ben had recovered only slightly since Thomas had seen him in the Homestead.
Near that, maybe twenty feet to the south, stood a squat building made of rough concrete blocks, a menacing iron door its only entrance—there were no windows.
They were still falling.
Then a thin shadow interrupted the light, moving back and forth.
This is my life, he thought.
Soon he was fully four feet outside the Glade, jerking his body from side to side as he tried to escape his collar.
“Doesn’t matter.We’ll die no matter what.” And with that, he walked to the door and left the room.Newt let out a deep breath and shook his head.
But fast enough, the dire reality of the situation began to hit Thomas, and his insides turned to rot.
Sooner than Thomas expected, Teresa had found him and was sitting next to him, her body pressed against his despite plenty of room on the bench.
Shut your hole till you know what you’re talking about.”Thomas, now slightly scared of the guy but mostly fed up with his attitude, moved to get up.
“What’s going on?” The dark-haired boy looked at him; his eyes flared for a moment, his head shaking slightly.
Why punish a guy for saving someone’s life?”
“So you do have an opinion—is that it?” Newt insisted, pencil in hand.
He began his new life standing up, surrounded by cold darkness and stale, dusty air.
“Somehow we made it to sunrise, or we would’ve had ten more on our butts before long.”
He shifted his body, wincing and groaning.
Tried to send a slinthead Greenie back in the Box one time—thing wouldn’t move till we took him out.”
Thomas wondered what lay under the doors when the Box wasn’t there, but held his tongue.
Thomas jumped as a terrible crash sounded right outside their door, accompanied by screams and the splintering of wood, like some iron-jawed monster was eating the entire stairwell.
Thomas was almost more afraid of their surprise visitor than he was of the Grievers just outside the window.
So somebody can sacrifice himself to save the others while we run to the Hole.
The shadows from the walls had lengthened considerably, already creeping up the sides of the ivy-covered stone faces on the other side.At least this helped Thomas know directions—the wooden building crouched in the northwest corner, wedged in a darkening patch of shadow, the grove of trees in the southwest.
Their cries faded, as if they were falling….
Almost at once the Grievers had shut down completely, their instruments sucked back through their blubbery skin, their lights turned off, their inside machines dead quiet.
“Well, the walls move every day, right?” “Yeah.” He could tell she was really on to something.
With a loud clunk, and then a squishing sound, the entire arm ripped free of its socket, falling to the floor.
“You leave that to me and the Keepers to figure out, shuck-face.” His hands were perfectly steady as he held the bow, almost as if he had propped it against a branch for support.
“You’ve always had one Runner assigned to one section, right?”
“Right,” Minho replied.
Besides the chairs, there was no other furniture except for a small table in the corner.
The four vines tied to Alby below hung tautly around him.
This went on for ten minutes, until they came to the long hallway that ended at the Cliff, where beyond lay nothing but the lifeless sky.
They finally made it to a rectangular cut in a long wall to the north that looked like a doorway without a door.
Sounded like three or four of them were just outside.
Now it was confirmed: the red light from its eye cast a creepy glow on six capital letters smeared across the torso, as if they had been written with blood: WICKED Thomas couldn’t imagine why that one word would be stamped on the beetle blade, unless for the purpose of announcing to the Gladers that it was evil.
Minho had pulled himself up and was standing once again, but he looked terrible, even in the pale light still available—sweaty, dirty, scratched-up.
It’s how they watch us, Alby had said.He caught a gleam of red light sweeping the ground in front of the creature as if it came from its eyes.
Minho stood, his face barely visible in the dying light.
Good night, she said, just as the lights went out.
Come on, let’s go.”Thomas was quiet as he and Minho got their things ready and ate a lightning-fast breakfast.
Several feet down the tunnel, she had aimed her light at a small square of grimy glass that shone a dull green color.
He was just wishing she’d say something to him when the door from the hallway suddenly whipped open.
Panic swelled inside him once again, almost too much to bear.
“The girl’s awake!” Thomas’s insides twisted; he leaned against the concrete wall of the Map Room.
But now it was here, literally around the corner.
“Med-jacks sent me.” “Why?” “I guess Alby’s thrashing around and acting all crazy, telling them he needs to talk to somebody.” Newt made for the door, but Chuck held up his hand.
Thomas followed, frustrated that they couldn’t take time to examine the walls, explore a little.
“I’ve never seen you before in my life.
Eventually, the day dragged to a close, and the setting of the sun brought the now-familiar grinding of the four Doors closing for the night.
“If you’re right.”
“I am.” Thomas knew he was right about the Hole, the code, the door, the need to fight.
Every flashlight in the compound was gathered and distributed to as many people as possible; Newt said he planned for everyone to sleep in the Homestead that night, and that they’d kill the lights, except for emergencies.
The next time they rounded a corner, Thomas faltered, his heart skipping a beat when he saw movement up ahead.
Twilight had fallen, and the mammoth walls looked like enormous tombstones in a weed-infested cemetery for giants.
He held one of the papers up to the light, saw how it shone through with a milky glow.
“Shuck it, boy, what you lookin’ at?” Thomas shook his head slightly, feeling like he’d been in a trance.
The lights of the monster shone brightly, casting an eerie yellow glow across the stone of the open West Door, where the Griever exited into the depths of the Maze.
The image had already burned into Thomas’s mind before Alby jumped up, blocking the view but not the moans and screams, pushing Thomas out of the room, then slamming the door shut behind them.
“Somehow I have to get through that!” He nodded toward the rolling pack of Grievers between them and the Cliff—they looked like one big mass of rumbling, spiked blubber, glistening with flashes of lights off steel.
The lightless elevator swayed back and forth as it ascended, turning the boy’s stomach sour with nausea; a smell like burnt oil invaded his senses, making him feel worse.
It paused by the closed Door that led into the Glade, only a few yards to Thomas’s right.Please go the other way, Thomas pleaded silently.Turn.Go.That way.Please!The Griever’s spikes popped out; its body rolled toward Thomas and Alby.whirrrrrrrrrrrrrrrclick-click-clickIt came to a stop, then rolled once more, right up to the wall.Thomas held his breath, not daring to make the slightest sound.
You can count on Chuck, okay?” Thomas had almost reached the front door of the shack and the small group of boys congregating there when he was hit by a sudden and surprise rush of anger.
On all four sides of the Glade, only the right walls were moving, toward the left, closing the gap of the Doors.Impossible, he thought.
It seemed to take forever, Gladers pushing and scrambling their way up the three stairs and into the seats.
The time had come.Everyone crowded together against the wall farthest from the windows, doing their best to keep quiet.
And the faint light emanating from their pursuers made the oddity up ahead all the more apparent.
His legs kicked out and he rolled onto his side, thrashing back and forth as if someone else were trying to strangle him.
We need to talk and decide what to do— without you here.” They had reached the door and Newt gave him a gentle push outside.
Minho hit a switch and several rows of fluorescent lights flickered until they came on full strength, revealing the room in detail.
Both boys ran in at the Griever and jumped feetfirst at the creature, kicking out at the last second with every waning bit of strength.
He had to quit wasting time waiting for them to come and end his life.
“What’s she gonna do, run around and stab every Glader to death?
Next was the southeast corner, where shabbily built wooden fences held in several cows, goats, sheep, and pigs.
Minho woke Thomas before dawn, motioning with a flashlight to follow him back to the Homestead.
Supplies cut, bloody gray skies, walls not closing.
Thomas jumped to his feet and stumbled forward.
The early-morning light had a sharp sheen about it, making everything look bright and crisp—the ivy, the cracked walls, the stone blocks of the ground.
That night, Newt and Alby gathered every last Glader at the East Door about a half hour before it closed, the first traces of twilight’s dimness creeping across the sky.
Most of them slept outside in normal times, so packing all those bodies into the Homestead made for a tight fit.
He stepped forward, wanting to see the Maze for himself, as if the answers were printed on the walls out there.
The stairs reached a landing, turned left, then came upon a railed hallway leading to several rooms.
He fell down at the sudden movement and shuffled backward on his hands and feet, drops of sweat beading on his forehead despite the cool air.
Thomas wasn’t complaining—it was the closest thing to normal in his life.“Newt found you last night and told everyone to let you sleep.
Baggers’d drag you off, and you ain’t no good to us then, are ya?”
“I don’t even know what you’re talking about,” Thomas said slowly, shocked at how steady his voice sounded.
Another corner of the compound held gardens—from where he was standing Thomas recognized corn, tomato plants, fruit trees.
And that door …Thomas fell to the floor after being released by his captor’s claws, and despite the pain of several lacerations across his back and shoulders, elation surged through him so strongly he didn’t know how to react.
Thomas huddled in a corner next to Teresa, hugging his knees, staring at the window.
Only one door had a light coming through the crack at the bottom.“The Changing!” Gally shouted from below.
Explore the walls a little more closely?”Minho shook his head.
Things seemed to hurt on him and inside him that he’d never known existed before.
The walls were really closing— trapping him inside the Glade.
“Man, you are one butt-load of sunshine, let me tell you.
“Solve the buggin’ Maze and find our way home.”
A couple of hours later, the doors having reopened, rumbling and grumbling and shaking the ground until they were finished, Thomas sat at a worn, tilted picnic table outside the Homestead.
Black water washed down the windows outside.
Even with that much on his shoulders he had to fight the rising flood of panic he felt.
No sun, no supplies, no protection from the Grievers.
“I didn’t see anything move that night we got stuck out there.”
“Those main corridors right outside the Doors don’t ever change.
She escaped by never taking her right hand off the walls of the maze, sliding it along as she walked.
He watched, curious, as they met at the big iron door of the small building; one of the boys turned the rusty wheel handle, grunting with the effort.
See how you do.”
Now answer my question, she said inside his head.
Shuckin' walls move out there at night just as much as these here doors.
Thomas felt an impossible happiness trying to break through inside him.
They’d wiped his memory and put him inside a gigantic maze.
A group of Gladers stood at the front door of the house, shouting to be heard over each other.
Teresa and Chuck bumped into him, almost sending all three of them to an endless fall.
The light was so dull now that he almost felt as if he were looking through black mist.
A thick silence followed the thunderous rumble of the Door closing, and a veil of darkness seemed to cover the sky, as if even the sun had been frightened away by what lurked in the Maze.
“And Minho said they think there’s a pattern, right?” “Right.” Gears were starting to shift into place inside Thomas’s head as well, almost as if a prior memory was beginning to break loose.
Can’t get out of the Maze, and this idea of hanging with the Grievers at their bachelor pad sounds as stupid as anything I’ve ever heard in my life.
There were no windows; the room smelled of mildew and old books.
He longed to be back to wherever that was, to run to the mom and dad he hoped still lived, somewhere, missing him, searching for him.
You don’t … want … to remember!”
Gally gave Thomas a long, haunted look, his eyes full of terror; then he turned and dove onto the writhing body of the Griever.
Looks like Ben’ll be wishing that arrow had found a home inside his shuck brain afterall.
Most of us sleep outside anyway.” Thomas felt dizzy.
The anticipation of what might happen was overpowering, a suffocating blanket of misery and fear that began to take on a life of its own.
Her eyes scanned the crowd again before falling on Newt.
Sure about what?”
“Are they changed because they want to go back to their old life, or is it because they’re so depressed at realizing their old life was no better than what we have now?”
Newt stared at him for a second, then looked away, seemingly deep in thought.
“Everything we do—our whole life, Greenie—revolves around the Maze.
Newt pushed open the door, the slight creak once again reminding Thomas of some vague childhood memory of haunted-house movies.
“They always compare each section’s Map to the one from the day before, and the day before that, and the day before that, day by day, each Runner just analyzing their own Section.
How could these walls move?
But every buggin’ time, the Grievers leave the collar on our doorstep.
He began to back away from the window, but something outside caught his eye.
A shadow crossed the light; then the window slid open.
He’d been so quiet, his voice sounded odd, especially with the hollow echo the Maze walls created.
Thomas followed, falling between Teresa and Chuck, hefting a big wooden spear with a knife tied at its tip.
A mechanized surge of machinery sounded from outside, followed by the familiar rolling clicks of a Griever on the stony ground, as if someone had scattered a handful of nails.
The walls aren’t even moving anymore—it’s like this has all just been some stupid game and it’s time to end.
The air around him had a greenish, muted hue, as if only several minutes of twilight remained in the day.
The real deal.”
Chuck didn’t say anything, but Thomas thought he heard the slightest of sniffles.
The pale, miserable boy still made no effort to resist, letting them drag him across the dusty stone of the courtyard.
His face still wore the long, weary look of depression, his eyes sunken and hollow.
Thomas thought that was strange, but apparently there wasn’t enough room inside the Homestead.
The red light of its eye was like a little sun, too bright to look at directly.
He’d recovered quickly, and ran now with almost no effort, despite nearing the end of his second hour of running.
Same thing happens out in the Maze—those walls shift every night, too.”Thomas, his attention suddenly snapped up by a new detail, turned to face the younger boy.
And then something rounded the corner up ahead, and came toward them.
Thomas stared in that direction, through the gap in the walls that served as an exit from the Glade.
He lay on the floor in one of the upper rooms, on top of a thick blanket, several other Gladers crammed in there with him, almost body to body.
I mean, last few nights, sitting in the Homestead, just waiting for a Griever to come in and steal one of us was the worst thing I’ve ever done.
The growing darkness of twilight was a perfect fit for how grim things felt to Thomas.
Fear, loneliness, desperation, sadness, even the slightest hint of joy.
“Only a couple of us know about it.”Thomas heard the creak of an old wooden door, and then Minho was dragging a cardboard box across the floor; the scrape of it sounded like a knife on bone.
Let’s just watch it awhile—if it comes after us, we’ll run back to the Glade.”
He took another peek, then quickly looked over his shoulder.
She, um” — he just barely stopped himself from saying she’d said it inside his mind—” she told me later that she remembers that the Maze is a code.
“Haven’t you gotten desperate enough to stay out there overnight, see if maybe something opens while the walls are moving?”
Minho looked up at him, a flash of anger in his eyes.
He reached down, turned the brass handle, and opened the door.
Then there were the walls closing and dinner.
He felt like a coward, but he knew that any fighting—and any deaths—would be in vain if they didn’t get that code punched, the door to the Creators opened.I know, she replied.
If not, he’ll get hungry and show up to eat.
Ignoring the gaping stares of everyone at the bottom—especially Gally—he walked out the door, pulling Chuck by the arm as he did so.
Finally, after the longest hour of Thomas’s life, they reached the long alley that led to the last turn before the Cliff—a short corridor to the right that branched off like the stem of the letter T. Thomas, his heart thumping, sweat slicking his skin, had moved up right behind Minho, Teresa at his side.
Yet of the two of them, Minho had broken down and panicked, only to run off at the first sign of trouble.
With a lurching squeal, the heavy metal slab swung open.
A few minutes passed before Thomas saw the first glimmer of light shine off the Maze walls up ahead.
Next, you become one of the first people ever to survive an entire night outside the Glade, and to top it all off you kill four Grievers.
New life begins tomorrow.”Alby turned and pushed his way through the crowd, then headed for the slanted wooden building in the corner.
When it was just a foot away, Thomas tensed his muscles and swung the spear up, around, and toward the ceiling as hard as he could.
It’d seemed such a victory just to save his life, bring him back from a night in the Maze.
"They should’ve come back hours ago."
A half hour later, fed and packed, they stood in front of the riveted metal door of the Map Room.
He jumped up and ran to the door of the room, yanking it open.
The look was fast—only a few seconds—but it was enough to haunt him forever.
A straight line of light appeared across the ceiling of the room, and Thomas watched as it expanded.
At one point people outside rushed the bus, their clothes ratty, hair matted to their heads, strange sores like those Thomas had seen on the woman covering their terrified faces.
Everything inside him churned and hurt; the tears that had yet to come burned his eyes.Newt nodded.
He looked in every direction but saw only darkness; he felt along the walls again, searching for a way out.
They half carried, half dragged the almost-lifeless body a hundred feet or so to the vertical crack of the Door, where Minho propped Alby up against the wall in a semi-sitting position.
Then, out of the corner of his eye, he noticed the other Gladers looking in the direction of the doors.
He was sure he’d never seen her before—but then the slightest hint of doubt crept into his mind.
Then he lifted his feet and hung onto the vine; his body swung forward.The vine held.
A line of small-leafed weeds ran along the edge of one of the stone blocks, tiny yellow flowers peeping through as if searching for the sun, long disappeared behind the enormous walls of the Glade.
“Get your butt to sleep and we’ll talk about it later.” He patted him on the head, then added, “You’re messed up, shank.” But Alby was already drifting off, nodding slightly as his eyes closed.
Two nights in a row only one boy had been taken, and people had started to believe that what Gally had said was true.
But deep inside he couldn’t bring himself to disagree—as odd as it seemed after what he’d accomplished, he had broken a major rule.Down the line they went.
Because no one who’d been stung and didn’t make it back by sunset has ever survived, we just assumed that was the point of no return—when it’s too late to get the Serum.” He seemed excited by his line of thinking.
Despite it all, despite the terrible crappiness of it all, Chuck smiled.“He’s awake!” the boy yelled to no one in particular.
Thomas was too tired to put up a fight.
After so long in darkness, the light stabbed his eyes; he looked away, covering his face with both hands.He heard noises above—voices—and fear squeezed his chest.
”With that the man made a few motions to his companions, then turned and ran out the big glass doors, his gun held rigidly before him.
Despite the fact that they’d run over a woman in cold blood.“Please,” Teresa said.
He remembered lots of little things about life—eating, clothes, studying, playing, general images of the makeup of the world.
He thought about flashlights and his memory.
Fight through the middle, push the shuckin’ things toward the walls.
“But … how could you possibly blame her for the walls not closing?” Newt stepped up, lightly placed a hand on Alby’s chest and pushed him back.
“All right, everybody trace the last ten or so days onto a piece of this stuff.
They pulled him away from Gally, who jumped up, his face a ruddied mask of rage.
The lights cast eerie shadows across the Maze.
“Let her out.” Thomas stood by the cell door, arms folded.
Ready?”Thomas felt a wire of nervousness tighten inside him, pinching his gut.
“Go on up.” Thomas regretted having come inside in the first place—but he did want to talk to that Newt guy.
A large, bulbous creature the size of a cow but with no distinct shape twisted and seethed along the ground in the corridor outside.
He felt like he’d lived an entire lifetime since awakening from his memory wipe, but he’d only been there a week.
Large cracks allowed for plenty of space to peek outside.
Plus, based on the last couple of days, the Runner was home hours early.
High and shrill, the barely human shriek echoed across the stone courtyard; every kid in sight turned to look toward the source.
They both connected, sending the last monster plummeting to its death.Thomas quickly scrambled to the edge of the abyss, poking his head over to see the falling Grievers.
Why don’t you quit moping at every word I say and talk to me?” Minho abruptly jumped at Thomas and grabbed him by the shirt.
The walls slammed shut behind him, the echo of its boom bouncing off the ivy-covered stone like mad laughter.
Thomas ran right behind Minho for two more hours, sprinkled with little breaks that seemed to get shorter every time.
I guess those shuck-faces don’t want us seeing how wonderful life is when you don’t live in a freaking maze.” Thomas felt a trickle of doubt that life was so great back home—what kind of world allowed people to make kids live like this?
When both were secure, Thomas did the same to Alby’s arms—right, then left.He stepped back, panting, to take a look.Alby hung there, seemingly lifeless, now three feet higher than he’d been five minutes earlier.Clangs from the Maze.
And the air had brightened ever so slightly; he could make out more of the details of the Maze than he’d been able to just minutes before.
Alby and Newt had reached the crowd and pushed themselves to the front, standing right over the doors that led to the Box.
But you can’t just make the sun disappear from space.
The sky overhead was cloudless and blue, but Thomas could see no sign of the sun despite the brightness of the day.
“You kind of get used to it after a while.” Thomas looked around one more time, the feel of the place completely different now that all the walls were solid with no way out.
He and Newt had just joined Chuck for breakfast at a picnic table right outside the Kitichen when a large group of Gladers got up and ran toward the West Door, talking excitedly about something.
“Alby didn’t wanna go back to his old life.
They started at the Box, which was closed at the moment—double doors of metal lying flat on the ground, covered in white paint, faded and cracked.
A sun couldn’t just disappear.
He then laid them one on top of the other so that each drawing of the Maze matched the same day above it and below it, until he was looking at eight different sections of the Maze at once.
The dim light hadn’t changed a bit since they’d woken up that morning, and Thomas wondered if anything would change at “sunset” either.
You said ‘The Maze is a code.’ What did you mean?”She shook her head slightly.
Thomas ended up in the large living room on the bottom floor of the Homestead with the same people he’d slept with two nights before.
Chuck had ended up in another room, and for some reason Thomas pictured him huddled in a dark corner, crying, squeezing his blankets to his chest like a teddy bear.
I can’t—His sentence was cut short by a sudden series of shouts and commotion outside the entrance through which the woman had come.
Thomas yelled out as he watched every extended arm of the monster immediately retract and clasp onto Gally’s arms and legs, making escape or rescue impossible.
“Alby, I swear—”
“She came straight to you after waking up, shuck-face!”
Anger surged inside Thomas—and worry that Alby would go off like Ben had.
“The code.”
“The code?” Frypan repeated, his voice lighting up with a trace of hope.
Apparently Minho’s pronouncement had already been whispered through the ranks, because the first thing Newt said was “Well, we knew we’d have to fight.” But the tremor in his voice gave him away—he was just trying to say the right thing.
The brilliance of the sun should’ve awakened him—had done so easily since he’d arrived at the Glade.
“If only you were my mom,” Thomas murmured, “life’d be a peach.” My mom, he thought.
Don’t you run out there every day?
The big door finally popped open, and with a deafening squeal of metal against metal, the boys swung it wide.
With its walls that moved, every night, he finally understood why the Maze was so hard to solve.
Across from that on the other side stood large glass doors, although the lighting made it impossible to see what was on the other side.
Massive stone walls, hundreds of feet high, moving like sliding glass doors—an image from his past life that flashed through his thoughts.
As long as everyone fights.
But Alby didn’t answer or slow down, and as they got closer to the box Thomas could see that dozens of kids were running around the courtyard.
The Griever Hole would’ve been pitch-black if not for the beam of Teresa’s flashlight cutting through the darkness.
They ran for a short while before they reached an intersection.
The sounds of shuffling feet echoed up the walls and the red lights of the beetle blades flashed more menacingly in the ivy—the Creators were certainly watching, listening.
Dark shadows filled the depths of the wooded area, despite the time of day.
You think I wouldn’t risk my life in a second to save those lugs?”“No … I … Sorry.
And whatever it was, to Thomas it meant one thing: the fact they could no longer see the sun probably meant they’d never been able to in the first place.
Again, neither of them made a sound as they fell—as if they’d disappeared instead of falling.
“Whoa!” Chuck yelled, the slightest hint of his old self breaking through.
The gray darkness seemed to press on the window from outside, with promises of bad things to come.
Two hours after that he started to think having dinner with Gally and the Grievers would beat sitting inside that stupid Slammer.
Think about that while ya sit here and stare at the bloody walls.
The trees grew thicker and denser the farther back in the corner they went, more alive and full of leaves.
You really think I did something that would send me to prison for the rest of my life?”
“I don’t care what you did or didn’t do.
Yet they didn’t sound like they were coming from the room, from outside his body.
He had to fight the bile that surged up his throat.
The metal of key and lock jingled; then the door to the cell swung wide open.
The Gladers compressed into a tighter group around him, everyone facing outward, huddled together in the center of the T intersection.
Thomas kept a steady pace as he ran with the other Gladers along the stone pathways toward the Cliff.
It was the section of pole with the leather collar attached to it.
About twenty feet across, the Map Room had concrete walls bare of any decoration.
He’d reached the door, an ugly slab of sun- faded wood, and he pulled it open to see several stoic-faced boys standing at the foot of a crooked staircase, the steps and railings twisted and angled in all directions.
“Guess not.” Minho squinted slightly, as if he was studying Thomas.
“Just follow me and run like your life depends on it.
“We still live inside the world you remembered.”
Alby stood again, his face showing his defeat.
The angle of vision from the window protected him for the moment, but he knew he and Chuck would be seen if whoever was in there pushed his head outside to get a better look.
Thomas swung to the right several more times before he dared to look back.
“Gotta go back.” Without waiting for a response, the Keeper turned and set off at a run in the direction from which they’d just come.
“Shuck things can climb the bloody walls, remember?
At first he could see only shifting shadows, but they soon turned into the shapes of bodies—people bending over the hole in the ceiling, looking down at him, pointing.
The Runners had returned at their normal time, and Thomas had grown more and more upset as he watched Newt run from Door to Door as they entered the Glade, not bothering to hide his panic.
The Runners’ll be back soon; then those big walls are going to move until the gaps are closed.” “You’re jacked in the head,” Thomas muttered.
The twinkling red glow of the lights held an undercurrent of warning.
When everyone was settled, Thomas found himself upstairs with Newt, Alby and Minho, and they were finally able to finish their discussion from earlier in the courtyard.
He let go of Thomas’s shirt and took a step back, then crept up to the corner around which he’d seen the Griever.
The screams of the other Gladers echoed off the tunnel walls as they slid down the oily chute.
They made good time—Thomas was glad for his wristwatch, with the skies being gray—because it quickly became obvious that the walls hadn’t moved from the day before.
Anything that could be done on such short notice to prepare for a Griever attack had been done: windows boarded up, furniture moved in front of doors, knives handed out as weapons …But none of that made Thomas feel safe.
Thomas tightened the straps on his backpack, held his makeshift fighting spear tightly in his right fist.
Just let the stupid girl out.” “I’m not stupid!” Teresa shouted, her voice muffled by the walls.
See ya tonight.”
He stepped out of the kitchen and into the courtyard before Chuck could offer to join him.
Didn’t even have a cushion.“Have fun,” Newt said before closing the door.
Otherwise, Newt had ordered all lights extinguished despite the pale, deathly glow of their new sky—no sense attracting any more attention than necessary.
Your life might depend on it.” Thomas was glad to have it.
She pointed ahead, and Thomas saw the narrow aisle forming in the middle of the corridor, Gladers fighting wildly to push the Grievers toward the walls.
He sensed light on the other side of his eyelids, but knew it would be unbearable to open them.
Blinking to clear it away, he suddenly caught the red lights again, flickering and skittering about deep in the darkness of the woods.
And then he looked up, through the leafy canopy of branches.The sky was a dull slab of gray—not the natural pale light of morning.He jumped to his feet, put his hand on the wall to steady himself as he craned his neck to gawk toward the heavens.
The tension in the room rose at a steady pace.
He looked like he’d just run twenty miles, face red, skin covered in sweat, clothes soaked.
“Has anyone ever been caught outside the walls at night and lived through it?”
”Thomas scowled, wishing he could find one little spark of hope.
Ben’s head snapped back as he was jerked forward, the Keepers pushing the pole toward the Maze outside the Glade.
Something about that Griever being dead and then not dead, something about where it had gone once it sprang to life …Frustrated, he put it aside and sprinted to catch up.
“Seriously, I need this.”
He moved toward the door of the room as if he really.co meant to leave.
More noises joined in a few seconds later, coming from all directions, the closest right outside their own window.
I swear.”
Alby put the keys in his pocket and leaned back against the Slammer’s door.
Finally, in a crooked cranny near a back corner of the Homestead, Minho pulled out a key and opened up a shabby door leading to a small storage closet.
A few clinks later the door swung wide open.
“Now!” screamed Minho.Just as the first Griever’s arm extended out to nip at them, Minho and Thomas dove in opposite directions, each toward one of the outer walls of the corridor.
For some reason the girl had popped into his head again, out of the blue, and then thoughts of Ben, and the dead Griever, which should have been a good thing but everyone acted as if it were anything but.His new life pretty much sucked.
Some kind of optical illusion or hologram, hiding a doorway.
You should’ve followed the rules and stayed inside.
And off they went, those six words burning holes in his mind.
He’d just rounded the corner when Gally came screaming out of the Homestead, looking like a ferocious beast on the loose.
Get them to the Cliff and the Hole so—”The sounds of the Grievers revving to life cut him off.
Greasy hair hung down, touching Thomas, framing a face hidden in shadow.
“And you think we can fight off Grievers?
Delve inside that brain of yours, and seek it out.
They got more by thumbing cracks in the wall, spilling broken chunks onto the ground.
But Teresa, sitting next to him, was a study in concentration, her tongue sticking out the corner of her mouth as she traced lines up and down, side to side.
The only other furniture was a crooked wooden dresser and a small table, on top of which rested a lamp providing what light they had.
He jumped up to stand nose to nose with Chuck.
He tried to ignore the panic flaring inside him.
But if you wanna haul it right now, we could probably make it there and back before the walls shut.” Alby looked at his watch.
But even with the ever-increasing light, he still couldn’t tell what was down there.
Kill you if I have to.”
Then he turned and left the room, slamming the door behind him.
Thomas thought he could see bright flashes of light far away, bouncing off the night sky.
It shocked him when he realized he’d been running for almost an hour—the shadows of the walls ran long toward the east, and soon the sun would set for the night and the Doors would close.
Despite the poor light, Thomas realized who it was immediately.
Don’t know how it helps, but at least we know now where the shuck Grievers go.” “And probably where they come from,” Thomas said as he took one last look at the hidden doorway.
And his limp body, to which Thomas still clung, seemed a cold talisman —that not only would those dreams of a hopeful future never come to pass, but that life had never been that way in the first place.
Let them do the fighting—we have to get through that Hole.
It was the strangest, most hard-to-believe thing Thomas had ever seen.Minho had thrown a large chunk, a piece that had fallen from one of the cracks in the wall.
”Thomas widened his eyes in question, felt his heart pick up the pace, even though it had already been pumping hard and steady.Minho simply nodded, then put his finger to his lips.
A deathly silence sucked the life out of the air as every last Glader stared at the row of windows, at the row of observers.
The smoke had lessened, but it still wafted out the door, a dark, hazy cloud covering the entire area.
"Thomas's heart dropped at the thought of maybe having lost his memory forever, but he pressed on.
A second later came another explosion of ripping wood: the front door.
And, Thomas noted, not saying a word,perhaps for the first time in his life.
Minho hadn’t explained, but he had made it sound as if climbing the walls was impossible.
Though that was what it seemed like—signs of the ball of furious fire nowhere to be seen, the slanting shadows of morning absent.
The first hour passed, and Thomas felt boredom creep in like rats under the door.
Yeah?” Her hands slipped back inside, disappeared.
He’d never felt like such a liar in his life.
Harsh sounds of chains and pulleys, like the workings of an ancient steel factory, echoed through the room, bouncing off the walls with a hollow, tinny whine.
If you want to throw me in jail for trying to save someone’s life, then go ahead.
“Better get as much of the Maze run as we can.
The world seemed to spin, a swirling mist of faces and color and light.
“Teresa?” he finally asked through the barred window of the lightless cell.Her face popped up on the other side, startling him.He let out a small yelp before he could stop it—it took him a second to recover his wits.
You really think we’ve never had the ingenious thought of climbing the freaking walls?”For the first time, Thomas felt anger creeping in to compete with his fear and panic.
Each step groaned and creaked under his weight; he might’ve stopped for fear of falling through the old wood if he weren’t leaving such an awkward situation below.
What’s that supposed to mean?”
Before Thomas could answer, the faint memory of last night, before he fell asleep, came to him, Teresa’s words inside his mind.
The walls of the Door were only seconds from sealing shut.With one last violent effort, Ben was finally able to twist his neck in the circle of leather so that his whole body turned to face the Gladers.
Better we all jumped off the Cliff!
Having been taken by surprise, the Grievers hesitated.Thomas jumped on the one holding Dave, tried to jerk the kid free, hoping the creature would retaliate.
“Um, I’ve never been outside the Glade.”Thomas paused.
Up a winding flight of stairs.
Even Newt had jumped as if startled, his forehead creasing in concern.“Shuck it,” he said.
In fact, with the freaking walls not closing anymore, I think we should try your idea—stay out there overnight and do some deeper exploring.”That piqued Thomas’s interest—he had been wanting to do that.
A few had bright lights attached to them.
Menacing shadows clung to the boxes of weapons scattered across the table and floor, blades and sticks and other nasty-looking devices seeming to wait there, ready to take on a life of their own and kill the first person stupid enough to come close.
The lights of the chamber flashed off the silvery surface—a wicked-looking dagger, gripped tightly in his fingers.
New developments in the Glade had just become a part of life.Newt shrugged as he dug into his eggs.
The sun disappeared and the sky’s gone gray, they didn’t send us the weekly supplies—looks like things are going to end one way or another.” But before Teresa could answer, Newt was running out of the woods.
Thomas backed into the corner once again, folded his arms and shivered, and the fear returned.
Though the sun and the shadows had seemed plenty to let him know roughly what time it was up to that point, being a Runner probably required more precision.
Thomas noticed small red lights flashing here and there along the wall’s face, moving about, stopping, turning off and on.
”Reluctantly, Thomas let the vines fall back into place and swung his backpack over his shoulders.
He jumped back and grabbed Thomas by the shirt, pushing him against the wall.“Shh,” Minho whispered.
If you’re in league with the shucks who sent us here, you wouldn’t have had to worry about the Grievers hurting you—maybe it was all an act.”Thomas’s anger lessened slightly at that, turned into pity.
They had pulled into a muddy parking lot that surrounded a nondescript building with several rows of windows.
“At least it won’t get completely dark—looks like we’re stuck with this twilight junk twenty-four hours a day now.”“Yeah….” She looked past him at the Homestead, then focused on him again.
I’m sorry.”
He lightly slapped Thomas’s shoulder, then stepped back, gesturing up the stairs.
Time to stay out there and see if anything opens up when the walls move.
“No, I don’t think that’s what it means—the walls not closing.” Newt folded his arms; he looked exasperated.
“Aren’t you dying to tell Newt and Alby about the Griever Hole?”“Hey, we’re still Runners,” Minho said, “and we still have a job.” Thomas followed him to the steel door of the big concrete block and Minho turned to give him a wan smile.
What’re you talking about?”
Thomas grabbed the two bars outside of where she held on, moved close enough to smell her—a surprisingly pleasant scent of sweat and flowers.
“Can’t the bloody Med-jacks handle that boy for ten minutes without needin’ my help?” He shook his head and lightly kicked Thomas on the foot.
He screamed, called for help, pounded on the walls with his fists.
“Yeah, Greenie, I run out there every day.
“Did you forget something?” He nodded back toward the inside of the Maze.
Thomas waited without breathing, braced himself for something horrible to come flying through the door.
That’s one of the reasons we run this place all nice and busylike.
Thomas heard someone moving around inside.“The bathroom,” Chuck whispered.“So?” A thread of unease stitched along Thomas’s skin.“I love doing this to people.
“Whatever you came here for—I swear on my life I’m gonna stop it.
Minho seemed to know exactly what he was doing, where he was going; he never paused to think about which way they should run.As they rounded the next corner, Minho attempted to speak.
Thomas, concerned for Alby despite his recent ill-tempered ways, turned back to Minho and repeated his question.
They ended up near the back of the Homestead—that was what Chuck called the leaning structure of wood and windows—in a dark shadow between the building and the stone wall behind it.
Chucky’ll bring ya some lunch at noon.” Thomas nodded and headed out the door, Newt leading the way.
Best be quiet now, accept the change—morn comes tomorrow.” Thomas said nothing, his head sunk, his eyes staring at the cracked, rocky ground.
Chuck screamed as he flew through the air, and he almost missed the target, but his feet went through; then his stomach and arms slammed against the sides of the invisible hole before he disappeared inside.
Thomas started to say something himself, but Alby had already made it to the monsters and jumped on top of one.
All I know is I saw two people struggling to get inside these walls and they couldn’t make it.
Why are you grilling me like this?” All Thomas wanted right then was for night to fall, so he could be alone, go to sleep.
How do we know it was the Greenie who tied Alby up there?” Gally paused; no one said a word for several seconds, and panic rose inside Thomas’s chest.
Things for him to think about as he went to sleep that night.When they were finished, Thomas headed back to the secluded place where he’d slept the night before, in the corner behind the Deadheads.
After they’d run awhile—Thomas had no idea for how long or how far, but he guessed three miles—Minho slowed to a walk, then stopped altogether.
whirrrrrrrrrrrrrrr click-click-click whirrrrrrrrrrrrrrrclick-click-clickThomas peeked down without moving his head—the Griever had finally reached the wall where he and Alby hung.
The sounds echoing off the walls were a cacophony of terror—human screams, metal clashing against metal, motors roaring, the haunted shrieks of the Grievers, saws spinning, claws clasping, boys yelling for help.
A group of boys milled around outside, glancing anxiously at the upper windows as if expecting a hideous beast to leap out in an explosion of glass and wood.
He’d just rounded a corner to the right when he slammed to a stop, his feet almost skidding out from under him.
He fought the urge to run out there, slip past the moving slabs of rock before they shut, flee the Glade.
Frozen, Thomas watched as one of the Griever’s long arms reached for the lifeless body.
Thomas froze as he heard Gally open the door inside and run out of the bathroom.
He looked down just in time to see the sun flash off something metallic—a toy rat—scurrying past him and toward the small forest.
Thomas stepped inside as well, followed by Newt, who closed the door behind him.
He buckled the watch onto his wrist and then returned to fitting on his shoes.
“We figured out the walls were moving right at the beginning.
Directly in front of them, a row of twenty or so darkly tinged windows stretched across the compound horizontally, one after the other.
Though the sun had a few hours before hitting the noon spot up above, there was plenty of light to see by.
“You and Minho get your butts inside, get yourselves checked by the Med-jacks.
“Ben!” Thomas looked toward the voice, surprised to see Alby standing at the edge of the graveyard, a mere phantom in the fading light.
Thomas felt a shiver of anticipation, wondering what was inside.
The leader didn’t stop moving until they reached a huge bus, its sides dented and scarred, most of the windows webbed with cracks.
The beams of light from the creature shone all over the place, completely random, never settling in one spot.
“Maybe it was to see if we could gain your trust despite having been a part of them.
The other Grievers had already gathered in the courtyard and followed their companion toward the Maze.
Thomas felt a trickle of courage inside him—he grasped it, clung to it, urged it to grow.
As Newt and Alby gathered the Keepers and put them in charge of making assignments and getting their groups inside the Homestead within the hour, Thomas felt like nothing more than a spectator, not sure how he could help.
He wanted to scream, run until he could run no more.
Teresa screamed inside his head.
“And that Runner makes a Map every day, and then compares it to Maps from previous days, for that section.
“No sun for the plants,” Newt said, “no supplies from the bloody Box—yeah, I’d say we’re shucked, all right.” Alby had folded his arms, still glaring at the Box as if trying to open the doors with his mind.
The walls haven’t moved, no exits, nothing.
But the trailing plant had yet to fall free, so Thomas knew it was still attached up there somewhere.Hesitant to try, Thomas steeled himself and pulled on the vine of ivy with all his strength.
But yeah, when we can.”
Newt pointed at a notepad on the nightstand.
For the next few hours, he and Minho scoured the ground, felt along the walls, climbed up the ivy in random spots.
But no one said a word; all eyes were glued to the girl, now lying there as if asleep, her chest rising and falling with shallow breaths.
“We have to be the ones to do it,” Thomas said as they leaned their backs against craggy trees, the once-green leaves already starting to turn gray from the lack of artificial sunlight.
He could see that where the front door had been there now stood a jagged hole leading out into the gray night.
Thomas awoke to a weak, lifeless light.
Alby remembered how awful his life was before he came here and he didn’t want to go back.
In the top right corners, Section 8 was scribbled, followed by the name Hank, then the word Day, followed by a number.
Once they left the lawn area and stepped onto the hard gray stone of the courtyard floor, Newt broke into a run, heading for the western wall.
“Well … he has been through the Changing—Griever stung him in the middle of the day just outside the West Door.
Thomas devoured each bite, hunger trumping everything else, the mood of contentment and relief around him palpable.
“We can fight’em off.” “Done it before, haven’t you, Hercules?” Without smiling or even waiting for a response, Newt walked away, yelling at people to finish up and get inside the Homestead.
The vertical row of connecting rods, so many they seemed to reach the sky far above, slid toward their corresponding holes on the left wall, ready to seal shut until the morning.
Then boom, it was back to life.”Thomas’s mind was churning, trying to get somewhere, only he didn’t know where or which direction to even start in.
Not a good person to pick a fight with.” “Yeah, but you’re smarter.
Despair hung in the air like the smoke from the Map Room, thick and acrid.The other Runners returned within the hour, and from what Thomas heard, none of them had found anything and they’d eventually given up as well.
He pointed to the northeast corner, where the fields and fruit trees were located.
“Okay, let’s go.”
Minho switched on the light, making Thomas squint for a second until his eyes got used to it.
Every inch of his body hurt, inside and out; his limbs cried for him to quit running.
Minho slowed at the corner, then stopped, holding up a hand to tell Thomas and the others to do the same.
His heart skipped a beat when a boy unexpectedly appeared around a corner up ahead, entering the main passage from one of the offshoots to the right, running toward him and the Glade.
The Runners had just returned and entered the mysterious Map Room, clanging the iron door shut; Minho had already gone in earlier.
But certain lines in the middle—lines that happened to appear more often than any other—made a slightly darker image than the rest.
Wondered when the fight would begin.
A heavy grating sound revealed double sliding doors being forced open.
Seeing Alby go down like that … a new kind of pain he’d never felt before filled his insides—an ill, disturbed pain; it felt worse than the physical kind.
Thomas ignored him, more interested than ever in the outside of the Glade.
Thomas, startled, swung around to look, his mind so concentrated on the vines that he’d momentarily shut out the Grievers; he searched all three directions of the Maze.
What if they’re supposed to compare the Maps to other sections …”
He trailed off, feeling like he was on the cusp of something.
Reaching out, he caught hold of a branch and swung himself forward to regain his balance.
“I said shut your holes!” the dark boy yelled.
Despite everything he’d learned and witnessed firsthand, it called to him as much as hunger or thirst.
The Keepers had organized and distributed the Gladers throughout the rooms, along with blankets and pillows.
They made it back before sunset, you dong.
Thomas could almost convince himself he’d be completely content, happy and excited to learn his new life, aim for his goal of being a Runner.
A line of icy cold shot across Thomas’s skin as he entered the Griever Hole, starting from his toes and continuing up his whole body, as if he’d jumped through a flat plane of freezing water.
“Oh, you’ll know good and well by the time sun sets tonight.
Just when it grew unbearable—just as Thomas realized the Griever was right outside the window —everything fell silent.
The walls really move?” 
“What else would I have meant?”Thomas had a hard time wrapping his mind around the possibility.
All we usually take with us is a couple of sharp knives.”He nodded toward a large wooden trunk in the corner, its top open and leaning against the wall.
His eyes were deep pockets of sorrow, sunken, dark.
Though it was hard to make out from where he sat, there was something odd about the stone edges of the exits to the outside corridors.
He heard a shriek as he passed by, a throat-scorching wail that could only mean the Glader had lost the fight, met a horrific end.
The heavy metal door of the Map Room was slightly ajar, a wispy trail of black smoke drifting out and into the gray sky.
Slicers do anything and everything dealin’ with the beasties.”
“Too bad I can’t remember my whole life.
Despite the number of people and the chaos of such a change, a disturbing silence hung over the activities, as if no one wanted to draw attention to themselves.
It was like a maddening itch inside his skull that wouldn’t go away.
Escorted into the Homestead by a couple of Med-jacks, up the stairs, a glimpse through a barely ajar door of someone feeding the comatose girl in her bed—he felt an incredibly strong urge to go see her, to check on her—into their own rooms, into bed, food, water, bandages.
A few seconds later the shadow stopped; the light settled to a standstill, casting three unmoving planes of brightness into the room.
This bloody meetin’ can’t be much more screwedup.” 
Thomas quickly gathered his thoughts, grasping for the right words inside the swirling cloud of frustration, confusion and anger in his mind.
As Newt leaned over to get a better look into the Box, the faint bleating of a goat in the distance echoed across the courtyard.
As he sprinted for the Slammer on the back side of the Homestead, he watched as Gladers started moving inside, most of them with arms full of one thing or another.
“It’s all your fault!” Without warning he swung his left hand, forming it into a fist as it came around and crashed into Thomas’s ear.
It seemed like it was mostly just trying to get out of there, and poor Alby was in the way.” “So it ran away from you guys?” From what Thomas had seen only a few nights before, he couldn’t imagine it.Minho shrugged.
The anticipation of fighting was almost worse than the fear of it.
She even admitted she triggered something.”
“He’s got a point,” Newt said.Thomas gestured through the door at Teresa.
The head was impossible to see because of the red beam of light shining right at him, though it seemed small, vision its only purpose, perhaps.
He willed his eyes to adjust as he squinted toward the light and those speaking.
“Glade’s cut into four sections.”
He held up his fingers as he counted off the next four words.
And we’ve kept fighting no matter how hopeless it’s gotten.”Thomas realized his voice had steadily risen as he spoke, and he felt heat in his face.
Deep inside he knew he had to go out there, into the Maze.
With open Doors and no sunset, there’s no point in coming back here, anyway.
A man walked up to the Gladers as the others in his group spread out around them, sweeping their guns left and right as they shot at the observation windows, shattering them.
Tonight we’re taking the fight back to the Creators, no matter what we have to go through to get there.
But he remained still, despite an odd urge to apologize and change the subject; he wanted to know everything about them.
The walls were closing.
“Maybe I should—”“Just shut your mouth and watch.”
Chuck quietly stepped up onto a big wooden box that sat right under the window.
Thomas stared at the spot where Minho had vanished.A sudden dislike for the guy swelled up inside him.
Underneath lay a small trapdoor.
In the exact middle of the courtyard, the still-gaping hole of the Box lay open, as if inviting him to jump back in and go home.
Alby pointed down at the doors.
Despite his lack of memory, he was sure he’d just been through the most traumatic night of his life.
No room or time for dummies or brats.” Thomas frowned, not quite understanding the drive inside him, urging him on.
Testing our ability to hope and fight.
But friends or no, gotta run things properly, keep us buggers alive.
When they reached the crowd, they pulled Ben to his feet in front of Alby, their leader, where Ben hung his head, refusing to make eye contact with anyone.
Minho had just turned a corner up ahead and was coming straight for them.
“It started with the sun flares,” the woman said, her gaze growing distant.
He picked them up and settled in, snuggling up against the comforting corner where the stone walls met in a mass of soft ivy.
But the thing that had really stood out to him was her skin: pale, white as pearls.Newt and Alby scrambled out of the Box after her, then forced their way through to the girl’s lifeless body, the crowd re-forming behind to cut them off from Thomas’s view.
He pointed toward the doors of the Box.
Newt had adamantly refused when Thomas asked to see the person he’d risked his life for.
Thomas squeezed his eyes against the blinding light of the sun as he emerged from the woods.
The walls had to be hundreds of feet high and formed a perfect square around them, each side split in the exact middle by an opening as tall as the walls themselves that, from what Thomas could see, led to passages and long corridors beyond.
Down the stairs, out the front door, he ran.
See you tomorrow.” And before he could change his mind, he slipped away, heading around the corner toward the front door of the Homestead, just as the last couple of Gladers were entering, Newt shooing them in like errant chickens.
Then it vanished, as if it had fallen through a plane of water or mist.One second there, falling.
Whatever the explanation, whatever that had been in the sky, the real sun or not, it was gone.
Even though he was nervous and scared, he told Minho he could take one of the sections himself, but the Keeper refused.
A large grove of trees filled the final corner; the closest ones looked crippled and close to dying.
Alby closed the Slammer door and locked it, then turned to face him.
The metal one with words stamped on it?” Thomas’s heart had started to race with excitement.Teresa crinkled her forehead in confusion for a second, but then a light seemed to blink on behind her eyes.
He and Newt left the room and softly closed the door.
He looked as if someone were about to reveal the secret of immortal life.
“They should be back in a few hours.
Chuck had to drag Thomas out of his sleeping bag in the morning, drag him to the showers, and drag him to the dressing rooms.
The cool air was refreshing, despite the dust and the strong scent of mildew.
He wondered if it’d just be easier to turn and fight, get it over with.
And he was growing to expect it.They made their way directly to the kitchen, where, despite Frypan’s grumbling, they were able to get cheese sandwiches and raw vegetables.
No one made a move to stop him from doing as Gally asked, except for Chuck, who stood at the front door, shaking his head.“You’re not supposed to,” the younger boy said.
So—” But before he could finish his sentence the rumble of the walls opening for the day cut him off.
He swung it backward with both hands and connected with Newt’s head, sent him sprawling across the bed as a small spray of blood sprinkled the sheets.
Thomas pulled up outside the small jail and caught his breath.
He crouched in the corner, nestled in the ivy, and threw his blanket over himself, head and all.
Thomas had no memory of his life before the Box, but he was positive he’d finished the worst twenty-four hours of his existence.
He felt an uncomfortable sense of vertigo looking at the towering walls, as if he hovered above them instead of sitting at their base.
But it’s all fading….He couldn’t understand how she did it, how she was inside his head.Teresa paused, then said something that made no sense.The Maze is a code, Tom.
“Newt, get in here!” The door was flung open before he’d finished his last sentence.
The Gladers surged toward Thomas, forming a tight group, forcing him to move out into the open intersection where the Cliff corridor met the long alley.
We can’t live here forever— whoever sent us here wants it to end.
That … that was the only thing he could remember about his life.
Chuck…One of the rescuers, a woman, sat across from Thomas and Teresa; the leader who’d spoken to them earlier climbed onto the bus and took a seat at the wheel, cranked up the engine.
No movement, no light, no sound.
Thomas had charged thirty or forty feet into the woods, dodging and ducking and losing ground with every second, when the beetle blade jumped onto a particularly large tree and scooted up its trunk.
“As happy a place as you could ever visit.”Thomas was slightly disappointed—he’d been expecting something more profound.
He headed out for the northeast corner, toward the big rows of tall green cornstalks that looked ready to harvest.
When wall-closing time rolled around, he started looking for signs of Grievers, was struck by an icy hesitation at every corner.
He grew uneasy and realized he’d slowed his pace, not so eager to reach the walls anymore.“What do you call those big openings?” Chuck pointed up at the enormously tall gaps in the walls.They were only thirty feet away now.“I’d call them big openings,” Thomas said, trying to counter his discomfort with sarcasm and disappointed that it wasn’t working.“Well, they’re doors.
Thomas pulled up short, readying himself for a fight.
Newt and Teresa, you can help me grab the first ten or so Maps from each section box.”
“What is this, kiddie craft time?” Minho held up the knife and looked at it with disgust.
Twilight fell upon the Glade and Alby’s screams continued to haunt the air.
Let’s get to work.” The next few hours were frantic.Most of the Gladers ended up agreeing to go—even more than Thomas would’ve guessed.
“There’s a hidden storage closet back here,” Minho explained, walking past some shelves into a dark corner.
“Yeah, makes you wonder about this place.”
For the second time in twenty- four hours, Chuck had nailed it.
He wanted to scream at the monster below him: Kill me or go back to your hiding hole!Then, in a sudden burst of light and sound, the Griever came back to life, whirring and clicking.And then it started to climb the wall.
At the same instant, he saw the Griever out of the corner of his left eye.
The elation of his escape had faded rapidly, leaving him with pain and thoughts of his new life in the Glade.
Alby stopped walking, and Thomas was surprised to see they’d reached the South Door; the two walls bracketing the exit towered above them.
He wished for all the world he could remember something about his previous life.
His brown hair hung down over his ears and neck, scraping the tops of his shoulders.
A crowd was gathered in the middle of the courtyard around the steel doors through which Thomas was startled to realize he’d arrived just yesterday.
Thomas was itching to go inside.
Though there had been no discernible change in the light since the sun and blue sky hadn’t appeared that morning, it still felt like a darkness spread over the Glade.
Thomas tried to imitate Alby’s lifeless body, hanging limp in the vines.
It was a big block of roughly cut concrete, with one tiny, barred window and a wooden door that was locked with a menacing rusty metal latch, like something out of the Dark Ages.
He showed up, jumped on a Griever, and they all took off into the Maze.
I feel like puking after what I just saw—no, I’m not hungry.
He still hadn’t spotted the sun, but it looked like it was about to pop over the eastern wall at any minute.
Newt caught Thomas’s gaze and gestured for the door.
In the distance, more breaks in the walls led to other paths, and farther down, maybe a hundred yards or so away, the straight passage came to a dead end.
Minho and Newt know the code words—we’ll tell them they have to get them punched into the computer if we … well, you know.” Thomas didn’t want to think about all the bad things that might happen.“Not much to the plan, then.” Teresa yawned, as if life were completely normal.“Not much at all.
Despite what he’d just seen, Thomas didn’t know which he felt more strongly—curiosity to know what was inside, or dread at finding out.
Smiled, despite it all, despite the sinister sound of what he’d just announced.
We live inside a place that seems to have no way out, surrounded by bloodthirsty monster-guards.
“The sun flares couldn’t have been predicted.
An odd moment of complete silence hung over the Glade.
It’s … weird.” “Weird?” Alby looked confused.“Dude, I’m exhausted, starving, and sun-sick.
Thomas helped steady Newt on his feet; the Glader couldn’t stop staring at the spot where his friend had disappeared.
“Where are we going?” Thomas asked, still feeling the weight of seeing those walls close, thinking about the maze, the confusion, the fear.
Newt said it takes forever just to become a Runner, much less the Keeper.
The thought surprised him, as if its source had been founded in actual memory, a wisp of light in the darkness of his mind.
Asking them to fight the Grievers was asking a lot.
It was hard for him to notice any changes from the day before, but Minho pointed out without thinking about it where the walls had moved.
It’s a medicine or antidote or something, already inside a medical syringe, ready to use.” He made a show of sticking a needle in his arm.
They’d come a day apart, she seemed familiar, he had a consuming urge to become a Runner despite learning so many terrible things….
Several Gladers he didn’t know were gathered around the table, standing; they all looked exhausted, their eyes sunken.
“We’ve already run through the whole section.
On they ran, some of the men and women leading from ahead, some yelling encouragement from behind.They reached another set of glass doors and went through them into a massive downpour of rain, falling from a black sky.
In other words, the sun that had shone down on these people for two years, providing heat and life to everything, was not the sun at all.
So many questions splintered his mind he couldn’t keep them straight.Alby pointed to the southwest corner, the forest area fronted with several sickly trees and benches.
When he could hear only the sounds of distant Glader conversations, as well as faint echoes of bleating sheep and snorting pigs, his wish was granted; he found the junction of the two giant walls and collapsed into the corner to rest.
With a metallic scrape the doors were opened, and a puff of dust from the surrounding stone rose into the air.Complete silence settled over the Gladers.
The walls were made of wood, as was the floor, and it didn’t look like anyone had ever attempted to make the place look inviting.
The light was dim, but any obstructions loomed as darker shadows and he was able to make his way quickly along.
Newt gasped and jumped up, stumbling away from her.
They’d been in the Maze for roughly twenty-four hours.
Thomas reeled in the pain, locked it somewhere deep inside him.
Show ya why them buggin’ walls close shut every night.
He crouched so that his head was positioned just below where the person on the inside would be able to see him.
If the sun’s really gone, won’t be long before plants and animals drop dead, too.
It was straight, the walls, solid, with no hallways branching off.“The last dead end,” he said to Thomas.
A quiver of arrows hung over his shoulder.
He couldn’t fight off the image that they’d been swallowed by some gigantic beast and were sliding down its long esophagus, about to land in its stomach at any second.
He could hardly see anything, and he knew, despite what Minho had said, that it’d be stupid to run even if he could carry Alby.
It’d been easy to talk about—the nothing -to-lose fight, the hope that just one of them would be taken, the chance to finally escape.
How fast you can bloody run is only part of it.
He craned his neck to see the top of the walls far above; his mind spun with the odd sensation that he was looking down, not up.
Thomas thought, feeling his own anger light up.
Just because Greenie the freaking superboy made it doesn’t mean the rest of us can.” Thomas rolled his eyes ever so slightly at Minho—so tired of Alby’s attitude.
Alby had slipped out of Minho’s clutches and fallen to the ground.
His skin was back to full color, his eyes no longer crisscrossed with red veins; he seemed to have gained fifteen pounds in twenty-four hours.
They had to hope the creatures would keep to their normal schedule and not come out during daytime hours.
Minho unlocked the door, cranked the wheel-handle, spinning it until an audible click sounded from inside, then pulled.
The woman pulled back enough for someone’s flashlight to reveal her features—pale, wrinkly skin covered in horrible sores, oozing with pus.
The Griever came to life, spikes popping out of its skin; it rolled forward, ready to collide head-on with its foe.
Thomas collapsed forward onto his face; Alby sprawled to the side with a loud flump.
The day had brightened considerably, the shadows stretching in the opposite direction from what Thomas had seen yesterday.
If we can fight off the Grievers long enough for someone to punch in the code and shut them down, then we can go through the door they come through.
Surprisingly, despite the dead light and everything falling apart, the day in the Glade appeared to be proceeding business as usual—farming, gardening, cleaning.
Thomas looked up at the enormous walls covered in thick vines—desperation had finally clicked him into problem-solving mode.
Honestly, I’m amazed that in the end, despite everything, we were able to collect such a large population of kids that just never gave up.
If we’re gonna die, let’s freakin’ do it fighting.”
“Inside the Maze or out of it,” Thomas added, relieved that Minho was firmly on his side.
“Close the door!” Alby shouted, one final insult.
A lone shape was sprinting across the courtyard of the Glade toward the exit through which Gally had just been taken.
“How can this be happening!” he screamed to the walls, turning in a circle.
Ben’s final screams were cut off when the walls closed with a terrible boom.
“Okay, give me the last few days of each section—make piles along the table, in order from Section One to Section Eight.
Either way, only he had heard the voice inside his head.
Just as it did, Thomas saw a flash of movement outside the window.
Seeing all these Grievers close up hit home with an explosion of reality—could they really fight them all?
The thought ended his brief moment of calm, stirring in his mind a million possibilities of what might live in the maze outside, all of them terrifying.
The open sky in front of him was a deep purple, slowly fading into the bright blue of day, with tinges of orange from the sun on a distant, flat horizon.He stared straight down, saw that the stone wall of the Maze went toward the ground in a sheer cliff until it disappeared into whatever lay far, far below.
I’m a Runner now—I promise on my life I’ll get you back to that room of yours.
It didn’t take a math genius to calculate that his speed and time combined meant he’d run roughly half a marathon by the time he returned to the Glade.
A large round handle resembling a steel steering wheel marked the only way to open the door, just like something within a submarine.
Come on.” He started toward the door, but stopped when he realized Thomas wasn’t behind him.
Thomas steeled himself, then jumped on top of Alby’s body, grabbing both legs and pinning them to the bed.
Thomas jumped to hide, pressing himself against the back of the building as hard as he could.
Flickering fluorescent lights shone from the ceiling.
Then you turn into some kind of freaky jungle dude, climbing vines and tying people up on walls.
If Teresa was right, and they’d been that close to figuring out some kind of clue to get out of there, only to see it literally lost in flames… It was so upsetting it hurt.The first thing Thomas saw when he ran up was a group of Gladers huddled just outside the large steel door, still ajar, its outer edge blackened with soot.
I don’t see any doors.” Thomas knew Chuck wasn’t just making stuff up—he knew he was missing something obvious.
The creature was a horrific mix of animal and machine, and seemed to realize it was being observed, seemed to know what lay inside the walls of the Glade, seemed to want to get inside and feast on human flesh.
Then, with surprising speed, the Griever pushed itself back outside the shattered frame of the window and began descending toward the ground below.
A door closed behind them; Thomas turned to see Alby and Newt heading over from the Homestead.
And with no more lights, Thomas couldn’t see a single thing.
“Your turn.” “What?” Thomas hadn’t really expected to do anything but run and watch on his first day.
This time he jumped from the chair and scrambled as far from the bed as possible, knocking over the lamp on the table; it landed with the crash of broken glass.
Teresa’s scream inside his mind was so loud it felt as if a dagger had been driven through his skull.
Never.” He pointed to the southeast corner, at the animal pens and barn.
“The walls move all over the shuck place every evening—same time as our Doors close shut.
He pushed the thought away before it consumed him.They made it to the kitchen and grabbed a quick breakfast, taking two empty seats at the big table inside.
But not today.”
All four of them looked over at the steel doors attached to the ground.
He grabbed the blankets that had fallen off the bed in Alby’s struggle and pulled them atop the sick boy.
Earlier, Minho and a couple of Runners had pulled out ropes of ivy and knotted them to vines still attached to the walls.
”Alby’s next words came out in a wheeze, as if every one of them would take a week off his life.
Stay out there while the walls move.”“Exactly,” Thomas said.
“Thomas?” Chuck asked, lightly tapping him on the upper arm.
The two ivy-covered walls on either side of him seemed to intersect with nothing but sky up ahead.
I wouldn’t call that taking care of me.” He turned back toward the door, intent on going inside to find some answers.
The woman and other rescuers shuffled the nineteen boys and one girl through the front door and up a flight of stairs, then into a huge dormitory with a series of bunk beds lined up along one of the walls.
Thomas swung, this time from above his head, throwing every bit of strength into the attack.
At least, we think that’s when, because we never really hear walls moving any other time.” Thomas looked up, happy to be able to offer a piece of information.
The sun had disappeared.
They tried to pick up the pace, but their bodies hurt too much and they settled back into a slow walk despite the urgency.
But then he remembered what Alby said about the moving walls.
”The events of the previous day came crashing into Thomas’s mind, and his stomach seemed to twist inside out.
I’ve been here a whole month, and I know the place inside and out.
“Okay, let’s go.”
They’d just stepped outside the Map Room, the heavy door clanging shut behind them, when Newt and Alby walked up, neither one of them looking very happy.
“The walls, you shuck.
His whole body shook, and it seemed like the vomiting would never end.And then, as if his brain were mocking him, trying to make it worse, he had a thought.He’d now been at the Glade for roughly twenty-four hours.
If we just had more clues—” He froze, hit by a dizzy spell; he would’ve fallen to the floor if he hadn’t had the shelves to lean on.
Tonight, they’d fight.
We can’t handle one Griever on our own ground, much less fight a whole horde of them in their little hole.
The only thing even approaching an exit is the Cliff, and that ain’t a very good one unless you like falling to a horrible death.” Minho tapped the Map.
Thomas watched in anticipation as Newt and Alby took positions on opposite sides of the shaft doors—a crack split the metal square right down the middle.
One way or another, there was going to be a fight.
So back off!” Alby leaned back slightly, stared absently at Thomas for several seconds.
Gally yanked the door open and stepped out into the hall, but before anyone could react, he popped his head back in the room.
But deep down, he held on to the hope that he could fight long enough for someone to punch in the code and shut down the Grievers before they killed him.
As he walked toward the East Door, he couldn’t stop picturing Winston in a dark corner of the barn, gnawing on raw pigs’ feet.
“Look forward to it, shuck-face!”As if the taunting gave Thomas a sudden burst of courage, he walked over to the lit door, ignoring the creaking floorboards and laughter downstairs—ignoring the onslaught of words he didn’t understand, suppressing the dreadful feelings they induced.
He didn’t want to meet the source of those lights, those sounds.
Common sense won out—the maze held even more unknowns than his situation inside.
The terrible sounds he’d heard escalate for the last hour took on a high-pitched, mechanical squeal, like a robotic death yell.A red light to his left, on the wall, caught his attention.
Old life’s over, new life’s begun.
Wet, black hair hung in strings around her face.
I quit bothering to look at ’em a long time ago.”Thomas turned back to stare at the sign, trying to suppress the feeling of doom that had risen inside him.
Thomas’s heart jumped into his throat; his hands started to sweat.
“Hurry!” They did, forming into a tight pack behind the door as they entered, one by one.
He wanted to run and hide from these people.The scratchy-voiced boy was talking.
Be thankful for these walls.”Thomas swallowed, wondering how he could ever go out there.
Ignoring Newt’s questions, he stumbled to the door and yanked it open, stepped into the hall, ran.
Huddling in corners, disoriented, crying every hour, not trusting anybody, refusing to do anything.
Anyway, it’s like being given your old life back, only to have it snatched away again.” Thomas’s mind was churning.
Needles of pain pricked his insides.
Alby poked at it with his foot like an idiot and that bad boy suddenly sprang to life, spikes flaring, its fat body rollin’ all over him.
“Cuz this whole shuck place is fallin’ to pieces.”
He shot Thomas a nasty glare as if it were all his fault.What’s wrong with him?
“Seeing that chick wig out made you hungry?
The Glade had gone back to business as usual—people working the jobs, the doors of the Box closed, sun shining down.
The place reeked of dust and mildew—a big contrast to the pleasant smells outside.
It was strange to know that the night grew later, that darkness should’ve swallowed the world around them, but to see only the pale gray light outside.
They were literally, in every way, inside his mind.
Stronger recognition briefly tickled the back of his mind—a flutter of wings in a dark corner, unseen but there all the same.
Once he and Teresa were done helping, they went to the secret spot in the Deadheads to strategize about the station inside the Griever Hole and how they planned to punch in the code.
Curtain-covered windows checkered each wall of the room.
“You wouldn’t be the first shank to fall off the Cliff.” 
He grabbed Thomas’s shoulder.
Someone, he couldn’t tell who, obeyed Newt’s order; he was being carried across the courtyard, through the front door of the Homestead, down the shattered hall, into a room, placed on a couch.
It was a strange and unsettling sight, like he was standing at the edge of the universe, and for a brief moment he was overcome by vertigo, his knees weakening before he steadied himself.Dawn was beginning to make its mark, the sky seeming to have lightened considerably even in the last minute or so.
“Better wait till the wake-up tomorrow.”
“Smartest thing you’ve said in a week.” 
Minho righted himself from leaning on the wall, hit Alby on the arm, then started walking toward the Homestead with a slight limp.
Before twilight faded to blackness, he was already in his new favorite spot in the forest corner, curled up against the ivy, wondering if he could ever run again.
They were almost to the door when a hand suddenly slammed against his shoulder, gripping his shirt.
Avoiding other people was his new goal in life.
Ya know, before.Me too.Seems like we… He didn’t know how to say it after all.I know.Wonder what tomorrow’ll be like.We’ll find out in a few hours.Yeah.
Thomas tried hard to force himself to sleep, knowing it would make the time pass faster, but after two hours he’d still had no luck.
He ducked to avoid a low- hanging limb, almost falling.
Unlike two nights ago, Teresa was allowed to stay in the building with the rest of the Gladers.
His back struck a hard metal wall; he slid along it until he hit the corner of the room.
Alby’d flipped once and for all, Thomas thought, fighting the urge to rid his stomach of its contents.
But until then, we’ll fight WICKED and stop the experiments and tests.” She looked carefully at Thomas, then Teresa.
But its body kept churning, trying to squeeze its way inside.
A few minutes passed, various Griever sounds penetrating the walls every ten to twenty seconds.
A knock on the opened door grabbed his attention—he turned to see who it was.
He backed toward the door, reached behind him to grab the handle.
But as he jiggled and swayed with the movements of the bus, felt Teresa’s head thump against his shoulder every once in a while when they hit big bumps, heard her stir and fall back to sleep, heard the murmurs of other conversations from other Gladers, his thoughts kept returning to one thing.
“And believe me, you or nobody else has the slightest clue what it’s like to be out there.
A secret trapdoor or something?” “I don’t know … maybe.
He did as well; his heart quickened when he saw that one of the doors was swinging open toward them.The beeping stopped, and a silence as deep as outer space settled on the chamber.
No, I’m just trying to be nice.The group was spread out across the full width of the corridor, running at a steady but quick pace —Thomas wondered how long the non- Runners would hold up.
Even the flashlights seemed to get swallowed by the darkness.
It’s just the ones a little deeper out.”“Oh.” 
Thomas returned to the crude map, trying to visualize the Maze and see stone walls where Minho had penciled lines.
The walls moved out in the Maze?
After a lot of deliberation, he decided to keep his mouth shut and went running with iDocMnho.fcor his second day of training, below a bleak and colorless sky.They saw the Griever before they’d even made it to the door leading from Section Eight to Section One.Minho was a few feet ahead of Thomas.
Emptiness ate away at his insides, quickly replaced by a sadness that hurt his heart.
But Thomas refused to look back, knowing every second counted.He rounded a corner of the Maze, then another.
Every Glader going in and out the door gave Thomas a stare; a few came up and offered congratulations.
Deeper it went, its red light glowing brighter as the surroundings darkened.
“All I want is one normal day—one day to relax.”
“Then your bloody wish is granted,” said a voice from the kitchen door behind him.
“One … two … three!”
They lifted her with a quick jerk, almost throwing her up in the air—she was obviously a lot lighter than they’d thought—and Thomas almost shouted at them to be more careful.
Newt was right—they’d better wait until night and hope that most of the Grievers were in the Maze, not inside their Hole.
I can see ’em!” He knew he should run into the Maze and help, but the rule about notleaving the Glade was seared into his mind.
He couldn’t believe how quickly the light disappeared.
He hoped it was only jitters, that his breathing would steady soon.
A metallic clicking sound from the branches above grabbed his attention, made him look up; a flash of silver and red light caught his eyes just before disappearing around the trunk to the other side.
Spikes popped in and out of the skin; its remaining arms swung around in mass confusion, at times impaling its own body.
A bright light on the end of one arm pointed directly at Thomas, only this time, the beam didn’t move away.Thomas felt the last drop of hope drain from his body.
Then he released the hilt of the weapon and jumped away, running back to Chuck and Teresa.
Exhausted, he headed straight for the Deadheads, went deep into the forest until he reached the spot where the trees crowded against the southwest corner.
He could’ve eaten a full-blown meal despite having had lunch just two hours earlier.
He stood outside the window of the Slammer, having left Newt and Minho when they went to investigate the sabotage of the Map Room.
They turned yet another corner, Minho suddenly taking the lead.
Thomas and Minho found nothing but stone walls and ivy.
“Since we didn’t make it back before sunset, probably.
He’d be happy to slam the door closed and throw away the key himself.
“So?” Newt replied, his jaw dropping slightly.
That he seemed indifferent to having his life taken away from him.
He wanted to run before it happened again, before she spoke to him in his mind.But it was too late.
As soon as his feet hit the solid stone floor, he took off, running despite the scream of exhaustion from his body.
I wanna spend some time in the Map Room before we head out.”
Thomas was pumped to hear that—he’d been curious about the squat building ever since he’d first seen a Runner go through its menacing door.
Soon, though, his hunger won out and he took a huge bite.
The frightening sounds of the Grievers grew closer by the second, echoing off the stone walls of the Maze.
A couple of hours later, Thomas was lying in a soft sleeping bag next to Chuck on a bed of grass near the gardens.
As they kept walking, he focused his attention on the other side of the Glade, the section Alby had called the Deadheads.
It seemed impossible.Then a flicker of movement to the left caught his eyes.Something stirred inside the Maze, down the long corridor in front of him.At first, a shot of panic raced through him; he stepped back, worried it might be a Griever.
How could a maze, with walls so massive and tall, be so big that dozens of kids hadn’t been able to solve it after who knew how long trying?
“How stupid is this—he saves Alby’s life, kills a couple of Grievers, and we’re sitting here yappin’ about what to do with him.
He looked up at Teresa with a sunken heart.
Thomas looked up, squinting to see that the sun was finally visible, though it looked odd—more orange than it should be.
It was as if they’d been hiding, waiting, and now were coming to life.
He put his hands under his chin and stared at the foot of the bed, almost a shadow in the dim light.
He followed Newt to the second door on the right and watched as the older boy knocked lightly; a moan sounded in reply.
He’d had no idea it was possible to feel so exhausted, despite the few hours of sleep he’d gotten.
Thomas hugged Chuck to his chest, squeezed him as tightly as possible, as if that could somehow bring him back, or show thanks for saving his life, for being his friend when no one else would.
Like I said, this passage is always in the same spot, but the route here might be a little different because of the walls rearranging themselves.
Use that code to shut the Grievers down and open a door out of here.
Teresa shone her light down on a steeply descending, slick black chute of metal.
They disappeared inside, pulling it shut behind them with a loud clonk.
All of this—the Grievers, the walls moving, the Cliff—they’re just elements of a stupid test.
As he approached, he figured he must’ve dealt with animals in his life before the Glade.
Thomas, when he should’ve been wettin’ his pants, took control, defied all laws of physics and gravity to get Alby up onto that wall, diverted the Grievers away from him, beat one off, found—”“We get the point,” Gally snapped.
“We found something weird.”Thomas waited, hoping that Newt or Alby would have a positive reaction to the news, maybe even have further information to shed light on the mystery.Newt raised his eyebrows.
Thomas realized that only that wall was moving, heading for its neighbor to the left, ready to seal shut with its protruding rods slipping into the drilled holes across from it.
Thomas thought, the world tilting around him as he stared at the lifeless body.
What if each day is a separate piece of the code, and they’re supposed to use all eight sections together somehow?” “You think maybe each day is trying to reveal a word?” Teresa asked.
As he moved across the courtyard, the distinct smell of firewood and some kind of meat cooking made his stomach grumble.
They’d just left without saying a word to anybody, bolting into the Maze at full speed and disappearing around corners.
He reached down and pulled off a shoe he’d worn since coming to the Glade and took a look inside.
“The wake-up till sunset.”
One day, Thomas thought.
They stood in a vast courtyard several times the size of a football field, surrounded by four enormous walls made of gray stone and covered in spots with thick ivy.
I figured there was a door that swung shut or a little mini-wall that slid out of the big one.
Dark wallpaper covered the walls of the foyer and hallway, half of it peeling off.
She pointed at the dirty square of glass, empty but for its greenish glow of life.
”Thomas rolled into a sitting position, hating that he couldn’t just lie there for another few hours.
Did you ever compare sections to other sections?”Minho rubbed his chin, nodding.
And despite that, despite the utter hopelessness of the situation, they still hadn’t given up.
When he rounded the next corner, he skidded to a halt at the sight in front of him.
Teresa had stayed quiet for a while, but she spoke up inside Thomas’s head.
Thomas followed Newt as he hurried down the stairs and out of the Homestead into the bright light of midafternoon.
“Some’ll stay and take their chances—guarantee it.” Thomas didn’t doubt people would blanch at the thought of making a run for it.
Break that rule, and if you ain’t killed by the Grievers, we’ll kill you ourselves, you get me?”Thomas nodded, grumbling inside, sure that Alby was exaggerating.
And he was lucky that the kid didn’t feel like talking, because despite the complete weirdness of everything that had happened within Thomas’s known reach of memory, he felt calm again.
He’d go down fighting.
Despite the alternative, despite knowing that if they hadn’t tried to escape, all of them might’ve died, it still hurt, even though he hadn’t known them very well.
Shelves lined the walls, and there were several blocky wooden tables; everything in sight was covered with all manner of junk that gave him the creeps.
Then he reached up with his hand and lightly tapped on the glass.
Newt very calmly stood up, walked over to Thomas and grabbed him by the arm; he pulled him toward the door.
He put his hand out to run his fingers across them, as if he didn’t believe his eyes.
Enjoy yourself.”Thomas groaned inwardly as he stepped inside and saw the one piece of furniture—an ugly, rickety chair with one leg obviously shorter than the rest, probably on purpose.
The code will open a door for us to get out of the Maze.
Thomas reached out and grabbed a vine two feet to the left of where he hung.
He caught glimpses of ropes and chains and other odds and ends as Minho’s flashlight crisscrossed the closet.
Then, from somewhere down the dark tunnel, came the sound of a door sliding open.
“How … did you talk to me inside my mind?” Teresa shook her head.
His eyes slid back into normal position, focused on Thomas, clinging to life.
Thomas followed his gaze just in time to see Newt walk though the slanted door.
But they’ve always studied them section by section, comparing one day to the next.
And the walls of the corridors were similar to those that surrounded the Glade, the ground made of the same massive stone blocks as in the courtyard.
Tell him we’ll all find a new life in another part of the world, live happily ever after.
Including you.”
“But how do you know me?”
He felt like the walls were spinning around him.
The sun obviously had not disappeared—that wasn’t possible.
Chuck.Two hours later, the bus stopped.
Thomas had just moved his attention to the four vast openings in the middle of the main walls of the Glade when Chuck arrived, a couple of sandwiches cradled in his arms, along with apples and two metal cups of water.
A multicolored flag hung limply at the top of the pole, no wind to reveal its pattern.
Then, after a long, tense moment, Newt stood from his chair and walked over to the door, opened it.
He felt the slightest hint of peace, as fleeting as it was, and tried to enjoy it for however long it might last.
They hit a dirt floor, and Thomas couldn’t see a thing until Minho turned on a single lightbulb by pulling a string.
He’s alive?” “Just come here.” Thomas headed to the right, craning his neck to look high up at the wall, searching along the thick vines until he found the spot where Alby hung by his arms and legs far above them.
But despite that, despite everything, despite all the woman on the bus had told them about the world they’d reentered, Thomas felt safe for the very first time since coming out of the Box.Beds were assigned, clothes and bathroom things were passed out, dinner was served.
I don’t miss it.”
“I thought the Grievers only came out at night.” Destiny or not, Thomas didn’t want to run into one of those things.
“We have to go that way to get to our section.
A couple of boys cried in a corner.
The floor of the courtyard looked like it was made of huge stone blocks, many of them cracked and filled with long grasses and weeds.
“Get me some water!”
Alby looked over at Thomas, who was shocked to see the slightest hint of a smile flash across his face before vanishing in a scowl.
I was gonna tell you—someone said they saw him run out into the Maze after he left the Gathering.
Taking heart at the slight falter, Thomas started screaming as he charged.
”Alby’s eyes fluttered open—bloodshot orbs that glistened in the light.
They were even more menacing in the faded gray light.
“You sure make it sound easy,” he finally said, trying best to lighten up the situation.
Has to be an illusion.He rolled over onto his back, groaning at the movement.
They’re huge, and they look like they’ve been standing here for a thousand years.”And the idea of those walls closing and trapping him inside this place they called the Glade was downright terrifying.
He thought much the same must be going on in the other rooms of the Homestead.
She seemed way more confident that they were definitely on to something.Box by box, section by section, they continued on.
Someone get help!”
Nobody moved, and deep inside, Thomas knew why.
Just do your part, he told himself.Steeling his nerves, he tapped his spear against the stone ground, then planted his left foot on the very edge of the Cliff and jumped, catapulting up and into the twilight air.
The Maze walls, moving.
Newt moved away from Thomas’s side and toward Alby—but five or six Grievers had already burst to life and attacked the boy in a blur of metal and skin.
A life of sorrow.His returning memories were sketchy at best.
“I … uh … want some answers,” he murmured, but he couldn’t put any strength in his words—felt himself give up inside.
The animals were in the southeast corner, mooing and crowing and baying.
“And why do you live inside a freaking maze?” He felt a rattling pressure of uncertainty, making his head splinter with pain.
Do you think I’m serious?” Without a word, Chuck jumped up and ran out of the room, his calls for Newt fading the farther he went.
A loud crash from inside revealed that the trick had worked—and the litany of swearwords following it let them know Gally was none too happy about it.
I risked my life to save you out in the Maze—you’d be dead if it wasn’t for me!”
“Maybe that was a trick to gain our trust.
And yet he didn’t know where he came from, or how he’d gotten inside the dark lift, or who his parents were.
A faint memory tried to escape the locked box within his mind—shadows on the walls when he was a kid, scaring him.
Newt had already made it back to the Homestead, but at Thomas’s cry he immediately spun around and broke into a stuttering run toward the Door.
“There’re forty-one of us.” He pulled the backpack he was holding onto his shoulders, and hoisted a thick wooden pole with barbwire wrapped around its tip.
Thomas realized he’d given up on searching the walls and was just heading back toward the Glade in a depressed walk.
He wrote the word GLADE in the middle, then numbered the outside squares from one to eight, starting in the upper left corner and going clockwise.
The tomb was smaller than usual—only the top half of the deceased person lay inside.
He felt sick inside.
I think his buddies are hiding him inside the Glade somewhere.
Then, just as they stepped through the doorway, Alby mumbled something from his bed.
Don’t you bloody do it!” The rods on the right wall seemed to reach like stretched-out arms for their home, grasping for those little holes that would serve as their resting place for the night.
He swung his body out and to the left; then he jumped toward the wall of the Maze, trying to grab another vine; the Griever’s vicious tools snapped and clawed at him from behind.
Poo makes a klunk sound when it falls in our pee pots.
Nothing we could build would keep them out.” But a commotion outside the Homestead shifted their attention away from the conversation.
Fight the Grievers, punch in the code, escape through the door.
It was too dark to make out clearly, but odd lights flashed from an unknown source, revealing blurs of silver spikes and glistening flesh.
He squinted, willed his eyes to work in the growing darkness, wishing he had a flashlight.
She visibly panicked, the blood draining from her face as she turned toward the door.
His memory loss was baffling in its complexity.Alby pointed to the large barn in the back corner, its red paint long faded to a dull rust color.
“It’s just the walls!”
Thomas barely heard him, too fascinated, too shaken by the closing of the Doors.
Into the gray air that seemed darker than the Glade, full of shadows and blackness.
There has to be some kind of hidden exit.” Thomas helped Minho as they scrabbled around the corners and crannies of the Maze, picking up as many loose stones as possible.
Graveyard’s back in that corner, in the thicker woods.
“Well, you don’t want to see him, trust me.” He continued to eat, munching on the apples as he studied the huge breaks in the walls.
Minho stood in front of the door with his hands on his hips.
He couldn’t see how the mammoth walls could possibly be mobile—felt so sure of it he relaxed, thinking Chuck was just playing a trick on him.They reached the huge split that led outside to more stone pathways.
He pulled the lifeless body onto his back and pushed with his legs, grunting with the effort.
He threw off Minho’s and Newt’s grip, ran to the limp, lifeless body of his friend.
How could anyone ever be happy in a life like this?
At every turn, they slowed so the Keeper could look around the corner first.
Not cloudy, not twilight, not the early minutes of dawn.
“So … it takes you a whole day to run through these little squares?”“Hilarious.” Minho stood and stepped over to the trunk right behind them, knelt down, then lifted the lid and rested it against the wall.
And the darkness was thick.“Who’s out there?” he called, his voice shaky and hollow—it sounded as if he were speaking inside an insulated tunnel.
Looks like magic, but so does the sun disappearing.”
“If they can leave this way,” Thomas added, continuing Minho’s line of reasoning, “so could we.” 
But there was nothing he could do about it—it was time to go.
Open the door.“Oh, really?” Newt asked, seeming irritated.
Still dazzled by the light, he staggered a bit.
Thomas stared at him, stared at his friend’s lifeless body.
He hadn’t realized how hungry he was until he’d started eating.
Then, just as they’d all expected, came the mechanical, haunted sounds of the Grievers outside.
“Hungry, Tommy?” Newt asked when they were outside.
Across the courtyard from there stood wooden pens holding sheep and pigs and cows.
He knew it was dangerous, but the idea of actually fighting the Grievers—not just running from them—was terrifying.
“You two shanks are the Med-jacks—figure it out.” Med-jacks, Thomas repeated in his head, a light going off.
The Creators’ll know when we make our run for it.”He’d been dreading it, but Thomas knew it was time to tell them the last part of his plan.
Not even a week of salvageable memory, and his life was over.
“I heard the door open down that way.”
He tried to push away the ache of it all—the horrors of the battle they’d just won.
“We’ll fight ’em if we have to, make a path to the Cliff for you and Teresa.
He grinned inside—he could only imagine Newt’s response to that request.
Suddenly, the Glade, the walls, the Maze—it all seemed … familiar.
On the left side of the East Door, deep holes several inches in diameter and spaced a foot apart were bored into the rock, beginning near the ground and continuing all the way up.On the right side of the Door, foot-long rods jutted out from the wall edge, also several inches in diameter, in the same pattern as the holes facing them on the other side.
Ironically, the feeling that things would be okay made him slightly uneasy.Not quite understanding how, he knew what he needed to do.
Minutes stretched into hours, although it was impossible to know for sure because every second seemed an eternity.
But down the road a piece, you’ll be fightin’ true and good.
Thomas, not wanting to meet their stares, concentrated on the girl; despite her paleness, she was really pretty.
I just wanted to see you before I went inside for the night.” But he didn’t want to leave; he almost wished he could get thrown in the Slammer with her.
He just about got freaking torn apart three nights ago.
The creeping shadows of the walls didn’t reveal the time or direction—it could be early morning or late afternoon.
A few grunts later and the girl’s lifeless body was dragged out, across the edge of the door and onto one of the stone blocks making up the ground of the Glade.
Ain’t needin’ a lot—pretty much run ourselves in the Glade.” Thomas nodded, his whole body itching with the desire to ask questions.
Or, at the very least, Thomas hoped he could fight them off from high up, one by one, instead of being overwhelmed on the ground.He had no idea what to expect; he didn’t know if he’d see tomorrow.
Plus, there’s still enough light to see by, as faint as it is.
“I didn’t think it mattered anymore—if you haven’t figured out the Maps by now …”
Minho looked disgusted, the pale light and fog of smoke making his face seem almost sinister.
“Break time.” He swung off his pack and pulled out some water and an apple.
“That first night, when you were bragging about being a Runner and all that klunk—shuck it, I was laughing inside so hard.
