Until tomorrow, then.
I need time to process the data, but we can touch on it in the morning.
Group B’s trial results were also most extraordinary.
At this time, let’s allow ourselves to feel hopeful.
The subjects will be allowed one full night’s sleep before Stage 2 implementation.
"Please respond with your own reactions.
We are, indeed, "good.
The mission of WICKED is to serve and preserve humanity, no matter the cost.
The subjects will eventually recall and understand the purpose of the hard things we have done and plan to do to them.
WICKED is good.
The one thing she chose to clasp on to?
Remember what the girl wrote on her arm before losing her memory?
I, for one, am encouraged.
We are all well aware of what’s at stake.
But to me, it’s an obvious choice.
I know I have my own feelings as to who should be chosen as the leader, but I’ll refrain from saying at this time so as not to influence any decisions.
For the good of our people, we will move forward.
But there’s no time for regret.
Oddly enough, seeing them this way, thinking all is well, has been the hardest thing for me to observe.
Honestly, I’m amazed that in the end, despite everything, we were able to collect such a large population of kids that just never gave up.
We needed to shock their systems, see their responses.
The boy’s murder and the "rescue" proved to be a valuable finale.
The responses to the Variables were satisfactory and encouraging.
Twenty survivors, all well qualified for our planned endeavor.
27, Time 22:45TO : My AssociatesFRO M: Ava Paige, ChancelorRE: THOUGHTS ON MAZE TRIALS, Group ABy any reckoning, I think we’d all agree that the Trials were a success.
1.
WICKED Memorandum, Date 232.
And for now, almost was good enough.
But almost.
Not quite a happy expression.
It wasn’t a smile, exactly.
Thomas rolled over, glad it was dark so no one could see the look that had settled across his face.
Good night, she said, just as the lights went out.
But nothing came.
He wanted to say more, much more.
Well, good night.
Yeah.
We’ll find out in a few hours.
Wonder what tomorrow’ll be like.
I know.
Seems like we… He didn’t know how to say it after all.
Me too.
Ya know, before.
Remember us.
I wanna remember you.
Then he said, Teresa?Yeah?Thomas was scared to share his thoughts, but did.
A full minute passed without any words between them.
Thomas felt tears swell under his eyelids; one escaped and trickled down his right temple, intohis hair.
Just don’t ever waste it.
He made the choice himself.
He died saving you, Teresa said.
Guilt racked him because he knew for a certainty he would trade any one of the Gladers in that room for Chuck.
But Chuck didn’t make it , Thomas said.
We all would’ve died if we’d stayed in the Maze.
Half of us made it.
Stop with the promise stuff.
He wanted Teresa to make him feel better, say something magic to make the pain go away.
What?
I	promised— Stop, Tom.
I	know.
Feels like I lost a brother.
But it hurts.
He paused, thought of that night when Chuck had scared the crap out of Gally in the bathroom.
He could be so annoying, he said.
Thomas felt a sharp pang and closed his eyes as he sank deeper into the misery of the night.
I’m really sorry about Chuck, she finally said.
There was a long pause.
He sensed her laughing, wished he could do the same.
Thomas knew it was a lame attempt at a joke, but it was the best he could do.
I think Minho’s farted three times in the last minute .
Guess you’re right.
Think not.
With all those stinky boys?
she replied.
Oh, yeah?
Wish you were in here.
he asked in his mind.
How’s your room?
But wanting to talk to Teresa, he fought it off.
He stared at the crossed wooden boards of the bed above him, feeling the pull of sleep.
Murmurs of conversation floated through the room, but to Thomas they seemed to come from another world.
Like a dream.
It felt like a hundred years ago.
Exhaustion consuming him, his mind wandered to his short time in the Maze, his time as a Runner and how much he’d wanted it—ever since that first night in the Glade.
"Minho said something else, but Thomas didn’t hear.
"Yeah, I think we’re safe.
There was only one answer to hold on to.
Thomas pondered the question for a moment.
"You think we’re safe with these people?" Minho asked.
" He couldn’t believe how nonchalant his voice sounded as he said it.
Grievers are probably swarming all over them.
But based on how many of us died getting here, I wouldn’t like to be one of them right now.
"I don’t know.
His mind had been occupied with Chuck and now Teresa.
"What do you think happened to the Gladers who stayed behind?"Thomas hadn’t thought about it.
"Yeah?" Thomas was so tired the word barely came out.
"Hey, Thomas," Minho said from above him.
As Thomas was settling into the soft mattress for the night, he was interrupted.
Thomas missed her desperately three seconds after she was gone.
The staff put Teresa up in a separate room, shuffling her away before she could even say goodbye.
Thomas shared a bunk with Minho, who insisted on sleeping up top; Newt and Frypan were right next to them.
He felt as if he could sleep for a month.
Certainly not Thomas.
Soon after eating, no one argued when they were told it was time for bed.
Especially when he was having such a hard time feeling it himself.
Thomas had gotten so used to looks of despair, it was almost unsettling to see happy faces.
But there were plenty of smiles.
Most of the Gladers had remained quiet through it all, perhaps worried that speaking would make everything vanish.
Thomas devoured each bite, hunger trumping everything else, the mood of contentment and relief around him palpable.
Real, bona fide, greasy-fingers pizza.
Pizza.
Beds were assigned, clothes and bathroom things were passed out, dinner was served.
But despite that, despite everything, despite all the woman on the bus had told them about the world they’d reentered, Thomas felt safe for the very first time since coming out of the Box.
His sacrifice.
A dark depression that might never leave—memories of Chuck and his brutal murder.
An enormous pit lurked in the middle of it, though.
Thomas felt an impossible happiness trying to break through inside him.
The staff.
The beds.
The colors.
They were smiling.
Their bus-driving leader left the Gladers in the hands of a small staff—nine or ten men and women dressed in pressed black pants and white shirts, their hair immaculate, their faces and hands clean.
Something.
co there.
But there was siDocmething.
" Thomas found it hard to feel joy, as if he’d betray Chuck by doing so.
Minho said it best on entering their new world: "I’ve been shucked and gone to heaven.
Too good to be true.
Seeing it all, seeing the beds and the dressers, all made up and fresh—the sense of normalcy was almost overwhelming.
After the drab grayness of the Glade, it was as if they’d been transported to a living rainbow.
Bright yellow paint, red blankets, green curtains.
The place was full of color.
Thomas took it all in with a distant and muted wonder—he was far past being surprised or overcome by anything ever again.
Curtain-covered windows checkered each wall of the room.
On the opposite side were some dressers and tables.
The woman and other rescuers shuffled the nineteen boys and one girl through the front door and up a flight of stairs, then into a huge dormitory with a series of bunk beds lined up along one of the walls.
They had pulled into a muddy parking lot that surrounded a nondescript building with several rows of windows.
Two hours later, the bus stopped.
Chuck.
But as he jiggled and swayed with the movements of the bus, felt Teresa’s head thump against his shoulder every once in a while when they hit big bumps, heard her stir and fall back to sleep, heard the murmurs of other conversations from other Gladers, his thoughts kept returning to one thing.
He could only sit and hope that things might be better now than they’d been in the Maze.
He could only sit and stare out the window into the rain and blackness, pondering words like Flare and sickness and experiment and Scorch and WICKED.
Still—it was better than the dull void he’d experienced earlier.
He felt such a raging storm of conflicting emotions, he couldn’t identify any of them.
He heard the soft sounds of her sleep, but he knew that sleep would be impossible for him.
Maybe.
Maybe we are, he replied.
Let’s just be safe for now.
I’m too tired to think about it, she said.
She simply shook her head and then laid it on his shoulder and closed her eyes.
Thomas looked at Teresa, raised his eyebrows in question.
"She looked away then, gazing out her window.
"It’s our hope that you’ll join us.
" She looked carefully at Thomas, then Teresa.
But until then, we’ll fight WICKED and stop the experiments and tests.
We’re trying to cross that land—to find the cure.
It’s centered mainly around what they used to call the equator—it’s just heat and dust now, filled with savages consumed by the Flare beyond help.
They call it the Scorch—it lies between here and there.
We’re separated from the Andes by thousands of miles.
We live far in the north.
"You’ll learn more in time.
"She folded her hands in her lap, looked down at them.
We can’t lose our humanity, no matter the end result.
We’ve sworn our lives to fighting WICKED.
"We won’t let them do this to children.
"The woman broke her gaze into nothingness and focused on Thomas, then looked at Teresa, then Thomas again.
Better to die than catch it.
It is an awful thing.
The Flare lives in theirbrains.
It’s all in the brain.
Finally it consumes them, destroys their humanity.
First the delusions start, then animal instincts begin to overpower the human ones.
"Most of the physical effects are caused by something else.
"                            She paused again, pulled a string of hair behind her ear.
All in an attempt to find those capable of helping us find a way to beat the Flare.
Catalysts to study your reactions, your brain waves, your thoughts.
Everything you lived through was calculated and thought through.
The ultimate test.
They tested thousands, chose you for the big one.
"As for you, all of you—you’re just a few of millions orphaned.
He sat and listened as the woman continued.
Horror grew in his heart.
"Thomas almost broke his own advice—questions filled his mind.
Unless the rumors from the Andes are true.
Only the richest can be treated, no one can be cured.
It’s a horrible, horrible thing.
People call it the Flare now.
The jungles were gone, but the insects weren’t.
"As the ecosystem fell apart, it became impossible to control the sickness—even to keep it in South America.
"She paused, took a breath.
Then came the sickness.
First our satellites were burned out, and thousands died instantly, millions within days, countless miles became wastelands.
Sun flares are normal, but these were unprecedented, massive, spiking higher and higher—and once they were noticed, it was only minutes before their heat slammed into Earth.
"The sun flares couldn’t have been predicted.
The woman almost seemed in a trance as she spoke, never taking her eyes off an indistinct spot in the distance.
Okay.
She looks like she will.
Just let her talk, he said to her mind.
"What—" Teresa began, but Thomas shushed her.
"It started with the sun flares," the woman said, her gaze growing distant.
"Who are they?" he asked.
"Thomas’s heart dropped at the thought of maybe having lost his memory forever, but he pressed on.
"It’ll take a while before you get your memories back, if ever—we’re not scientists, we have no idea what they did to you, or how they did it.
"The woman looked back and forth between Thomas and Teresa, then let out a sigh.
"Please tell us something.
"Please," Teresa said.
Despite the fact that they’d run over a woman in cold blood.
" The woman’s voice came out much kinder than Thomas had expected, giving him hope that she truly was a friend—that all of their rescuers were friends.
"That’s a very long story.
Dark eyes full of sorrow.
Wet, black hair hung in strings around her face.
The woman looked over at him.
"What’s going on?" he asked, not sure how else to pose it.
He finally got up enough nerve to speak to the woman sitting across the aisle.
Teresa remained silent next to Thomas.
The bus never slowed.
They pounded on the sides of the vehicle as if they wanted to get on, wanted to escape whatever horrible lives they were living.
At one point people outside rushed the bus, their clothes ratty, hair matted to their heads, strange sores like those Thomas had seen on the woman covering their terrified faces.
Lights and buildings were warped and watery, like something out of a drug-induced hallucination.
The driver drove at reckless speeds, through towns and cities, the heavy rain obscuring most of the view.
The next hour or so was a blur of sights and sounds for Thomas.
Without a word, the driver kept his foot on the gas and the bus plowed forward, driving off into the rain-swept night.
Thomas looked at Teresa, saw the sickened look on her face that surely mirrored his own.
A thump almost jolted Thomas out of his seat as the front wheels ran over her, quickly followed by a second thump—the back wheels.
The driver gunned the engine—the bus lurched as it slammed into the woman’s body.
Or if they did, they didn’t care.
"Wait!" Thomas shrieked, but no one heard him.
He leaned toward the glass of the window as she disappeared from his view up ahead.
Her eyes were lit with lunacy or terror— Thomas couldn’t tell which.
The sore-riddled woman had gotten to her feet, was sprinting toward the front of the bus, waving her arms wildly, screaming something drowned out by the sounds of the storm.
Just as it did, Thomas saw a flash of movement outside the window.
The bus started rolling forward.
Chuck…One of the rescuers, a woman, sat across from Thomas and Teresa; the leader who’d spoken to them earlier climbed onto the bus and took a seat at the wheel, cranked up the engine.
He just didn’t care, didn’t feel any relief at escaping the Maze.
Thoughts of Chuck flooded him again, replacing the crazy woman, deadening his heart.
Thomas couldn’t answer, just shook his head.
Teresa said in his mind.
What was that?
The rain drummed on the roof, heavy; thunder shook the skies above them.
Black water washed down the windows outside.
Wide eyes watched him as they walked all the way to the back seat and plopped down; they huddled together.
"Get on the bus!"Thomas, so terrified by the ordeal that his body shook, turned and followed Teresa up the stairs and into the aisle of the bus.
"Stay put or I’ll shoot you dead!" he yelled at her; then he turned to Thomas.
Gonna save us from the Flare, ya are!"When the man was several yards from the bus, he tossed the woman to the ground.
She pointed at him, called out, "Don’t believe a word they tell ya!
He backed into Teresa, staring as the man dragged the woman away, her legs kicking out weakly, her eyes on Thomas.
The woman yelped when one of the rescuers grabbed her with both hands and yanked her off of Thomas, who recovered his wits and scrambled to his feet.
"Gonna save us from the Flare!" She laughed, not much more than a hacking cough.
"Gonna save us all!" the hideous woman said, spit flying out of her mouth, spraying Thomas.
Sheer terror filled Thomas, froze him.
co flashlight to reveal her features—pale, wrinkly skin covered in horrible sores, oozing with pus.
The woman pulled back enough for siDocmeone’s.
A horrible smell filled his nostrils, like eggs and milk gone rotten.
Greasy hair hung down, touching Thomas, framing a face hidden in shadow.
A bolt of pain shot down his spine as a woman’s head appeared two inches above him, upside down, blocking out Teresa.
He cried out as someone jerked him backward, ripping his hand out of Teresa’s—he saw her spin around just in time to watch as he slammed into the ground, throwing up a spray of water.
They were almost to the door when a hand suddenly slammed against his shoulder, gripping his shirt.
He focused on the bus, on Teresa, on escape.
Maybe it was just the ferocity of the deluge.
Oddly, it helped break him out of his funk, snap him to attention.
Thomas looked up into the sky, felt the water beat against his face—it was warm, almost hot, had a weird thickness to it.
Thomas was at the back, Teresa right in front of him.
It seemed to take forever, Gladers pushing and scrambling their way up the three stairs and into the seats.
"Hurry!"They did, forming into a tight pack behind the door as they entered, one by one.
"Get on!" the man screamed.
Rain sluiced down it all, making Thomas imagine a huge beast cresting out of the ocean.
The leader didn’t stop moving until they reached a huge bus, its sides dented and scarred, most of the windows webbed with cracks.
Nothing was visible but dull sparkles flashing off the pounding sheets of water.
They reached another set of glass doors and went through them into a massive downpour of rain, falling from a black sky.
On they ran, some of the men and women leading from ahead, some yelling encouragement from behind.
He kept going.
A void.
There was only emptiness now.
But he’d seen too much.
Thomas wanted to ache for Chuck, get excited about their escape, rejoice that Teresa was there with him.
More hallways.
Up more stairs.
Down another hallway.
Everything was dark, smelled like electronics.
Up a winding flight of stairs.
He ran down a long hallway, into a dimly lit tunnel.
Thomas felt no emotion—he was completely numb.
They had no choice but to leave Chuck’s body behind.
Thomas, his hand still gripping Teresa’s, ran with them, bunched up in the back of the group.
After the briefest hesitation, the Gladers followed, almost stomping each other in their rush to get out of the chamber, as far away from the Grievers and the Maze as possible.
"Go!" one of the rescuers—that was the only way Thomas could think of them—screamed from behind.
Gunfire and cries of agony still rattled the chamber, but Thomas did his best to ignore them and follow instructions.
"With that the man made a few motions to his companions, then turned and ran out the big glass doors, his gun held rigidly before him.
Because it does.
"Just follow me and run like your life depends on it.
"We don’t have time to explain," the man said, his voice as strained as his face.
He had dark hair, his face young but full of wrinkles around the eyes, as if he’d spent each day of his life worrying abouthow to make it to the next.
Thomas heard screams, saw blood, looked away, focused on the man who approached them.
A man walked up to the Gladers as the others in his group spread out around them, sweeping their guns left and right as they shot at the observation windows, shattering them.
Thomas took several steps backward, almost stumbled.
She was dead, a bloody mess.
No—Flashes lit the air as several shots exploded from the gun, slamming into the woman’s body.
No way, Thomas thought.
Then one stepped back and drew up his gun, aimed.
Thomas stared in shock as two of the newcomers tackled the WICKED woman to the floor.
Almost like toys abandoned in the woods for years, recently discovered by the next generation of kids ready to play war.
Their guns—some were rifles, other pistols—looked … archaic, rustic.
It was impossible to understand what they were saying.
Several men and women dressed in grimy jeans and soaking-wet coats burst through the entrance with guns raised, yelling and screaming words over each other.
Thomas followed her gaze.
She visibly panicked, the blood draining from her face as she turned toward the door.
I can’t—His sentence was cut short by a sudden series of shouts and commotion outside the entrance through which the woman had come.
I don’t know, he replied.
she asked.
What now?
Teresa placed her other hand on his arm, gripped his bicep.
But he did nothing.
"Thomas looked at her, threw all his compressed hatred into the glare.
"You must understand this.
"All things happen for a purpose," she said, any sign of malice now gone from her voice.
The woman from WICKED broke the silence.
No one looked at Gally, breathing but still.
No one else said a word, most of them staring at Chuck’s body without expression, as if they’d moved far beyond feeling.
He squeezed, tried to say what he felt by doing so.
Once he was up, she didn’t let go, and neither did he.
She reached down, grabbed his hand, helped him stand.
Looked up at Teresa and her enormous blue eyes, heavy with sadness—just as much for him as for Chuck, he was sure of it.
Finally, he looked up.
He wiped the tears from his cheeks, rubbed his eyes, thinking he should be embarrassed but not feeling that way.
He let go of Chuck, slumped backward, trying not to look at the boy’s shirt, black with blood.
Whatever darkness awaited them, they’d be together, and that was all that mattered right then.
For Newt and Minho.
He did it for Teresa.
Thomas reeled in the pain, locked it somewhere deep inside him.
But not much good floated in the muck.
His returning memories were sketchy at best.
A life of sorrow.
That even in escape, dreary days lay ahead.
And his limp body, to which Thomas still clung, seemed a cold talisman —that not only would those dreams of a hopeful future never come to pass, but that life had never been that way in the first place.
But now Chuck was gone.
Be happy.
Have bacon and eggs for breakfast, go to a real school.
Get kissed goodnight.
Sleep in beds.
In the Glade, Chuck had become a symbol for him—a beacon that somehow they could make everything right again in the world.
He finally pulled it all back into his heart, sucking in the painful tide of his misery.
His great, racking sobs echoed through the chamber like the sounds of tortured pain.
Thomas cried, wept like he’d never wept before.
Thomas hugged Chuck to his chest, squeezed him as tightly as possible, as if that could somehow bring him back, or show thanks for saving his life, for being his friend when no one else would.
I promised him!"Teresa didn’t respond, only nodded, her eyes cast to the ground.
"I promised I’d save him, take him home!
Almost insanity.
"I promised him!" he screamed, realizing even as he did so that his voice was laced with something wrong.
He shook it away.
"No!"Teresa was there, put her hand on his shoulder.
"No!" Thomas shouted, sadness consuming him.
He grabbed him, pulled him back into his arms, ignoring the blood, ignoring the frozen look of death on the boy’s face.
He threw off Minho’s and Newt’s grip, ran to the limp, lifeless body of his friend.
There were only thoughts of Chuck.
And then, just like that, it all vanished.
co.
His eyes remained on Gally, lying there, still; Thomas could feel the hatred pouring out, as if a visible line of flame connected them.
They dragged him across the floor; he fought them, squirmed, yelled to be iDocleftalone.
And then he was being pulled away by Minho and Newt, his arms still flailing even when they only hit air.
He beat him—beat him as he released every ounce of rage he’d ever owned.
Thomas didn’t know which were louder—Gally’s or his own.
There was crunching, there was blood, there were horrible screams.
Down and down and down, slamming his balled knuckles into the boy’s cheek and nose.
He held Gally down with his left hand, pushing down on the boy’s neck, as his right fist rained punches upon Gally’s face, one after another.
Thomas started punching.
He straddled the boy’s torso, gripped him with his legs so he couldn’t escape.
He found the boy’s throat, squeezed, fell to the ground on top of him.
He rushed forward, threw himself on Gally, grasping with his fingers like claws.
He completely and utterly snapped.
And then Thomas snapped.
He let go of Chuck, stood up, trembling, turned to face their new visitors.
Through his mind.
And then it exploded, bursting through his lungs, through his neck, through his arms and legs.
Something dark and terrible.
Of hate.
Of revenge.
It started deep down in his chest, a seed of rage.
Something happened within Thomas.
Thomas stared at him, stared at his friend’s lifeless body.
One last breath wheezed from his mouth.
His eyes closed, his body went limp.
"Tell her …"He didn’t finish.
" A racking cough burst from his lungs, throwing a spray of blood.
"Find … my mom.
"Thomas," Chuck whispered.
Anyone but Chuck.
Not Chuck.
No, he thought.
Black spots swam before Thomas’s eyes; the room tilted and swayed.
It was over.
Nothing could help now.
Someone get help!"Nobody moved, and deep inside, Thomas knew why.
"Don’t die—fight it.
"Hang on, Chuck," Thomas said.
" It was one word, barely there.
"Thom … mas.
His eyes slid back into normal position, focused on Thomas, clinging to life.
They—The boy stopped convulsing, stilled.
They could save him.
There had to be something they could do.
"Chuck …," Thomas said, this time a whisper.
Blood trickled out of his nose and mouth.
Chuck’s eyes had rolled up in their sockets, dull white orbs.
"Chuck!"The boy shook uncontrollably, blood everywhere, wetting Thomas’s hands.
"Chuck!" he screamed; his voice felt like acid ripping through his throat.
He fell to the ground, pulled Chuck’s shaking body into his arms.
Thomas felt as if the world were collapsing around him, crushing his heart.
Red spit oozed from between his lips.
His legs slapped against the floor, feet kicking aimlessly with onrushing death.
Blood poured from the wound, dark crimson.
The boy screamed, fell to the floor, his body already convulsing.
With a sickening, wet thunk, the dagger slammed into Chuck’s chest, burying itself to the hilt.
Thomas felt as if his feet had been frozen in blocks of ice; he could only stare at the scene of horror unfolding before him, completely helpless.
Then, inexplicably, Chuck was there, diving in front of him.
A strangled cry was forming in his throat; he urged himself to move but he couldn’t.
On the knife came, flipping over and over, straight at him.
As if it did so for the sole purpose of allowing him to feel the terror of seeing such a thing.
con.
The blade windmilled, its every turn visible to Thomas, as if the world had turned to slowiDocmti.
Toward him.
As he did so, Thomas heard a shout to his right, sensed movement.
With unexpected speed, he reared back and threw the knife at Thomas.
The lights of the chamber flashed off the silvery surface—a wicked-looking dagger, gripped tightly in his fingers.
Gally reached behind himself, pulled something long and shiny from his back pocket.
What did it—But Thomas didn’t have time to finish his thought.
The same type of thing had happened to him.
It was just like Alby in bed, back in the Glade, after he went through the Changing.
Then he stilled, his face calming, his body relaxing.
"I … have … to …" Each word was a croaking cough.
"They … can control me … I don’t—" His eyes bulged, a hand went to his throat as if he were choking.
Words burst from Gally’s mouth.
"Gally?" Thomas asked, trying to suppress the complete hatred he had for him.
His lips pressed together; the skin around them twitched, as if he were trying to speak but couldn’t.
The boy’s whole body trembled, his face pasty white, making his wet, red eyes stand out like bloody splotches on paper.
Thomas focused on Gally.
" She stepped back.
"There is, of course, one final Variable.
"She paused.
Dark times.
Dark times, Mr.
Newton.
If you don’t, then the whole thing was a mistake.
I can only promise this, and trust your minds to accept it.
"One day you’ll all be grateful for what we’ve done for you.
The woman nodded as if proud of him.
Worse than before.
Something’s off with him, Thomas thought.
But he didn’t respond.
"What’s going on?"The dark-haired boy looked at him; his eyes flared for a moment, his head shaking slightly.
"Gally," Newt said.
Minho started to retort, but Newt elbowed him in the gut.
" Her condescending tone shocked Thomas.
I’d expect more maturity from someone who’s passed the Maze Trials.
"You have no idea what you’re talking about, boy.
She narrowed her eyes as she looked at Minho.
We wanna see the police, the mayor, the president—somebody!" Thomas worried what Minho might do—then again, Thomas kind of wanted him to go punch her in the face.
"Who are you, telling us to be at ease?
""At ease?" Minho barked.
"Please, be at ease.
"You’re safe now," the woman responded as if she hadn’t heard him.
"What’s he doing here!" Minho shouted.
It was Gally.
He was consumed with shock and anger.
Thomas blinked, then rubbed his eyes, like something out of a cartoon.
Thomas felt his knees buckle.
Every Glader in the room sucked in a breath of surprise.
He looked up, his eyes wet with tears.
"She glanced over at her companion, then reached out and pulled the hood off the boy.
Although we expected a few more of you to give up along the way.
"Everything has gone according to plan, Mr.
Newton.
Her eyes scanned the crowd again before falling on Newt.
"Excuse me?" Newt asked.
" Thomas felt his mouth drop open—felt anger redden his face.
Amazing.
"Over two years, and so few dead.
"Welcome back," the woman finally said.
The other person, standing next to her, was a boy wearing an overly large sweatshirt, its hood pulled up over his head, concealing his face.
She stopped several feet in front of the Gladers and slowly looked left to right, taking them all in.
And not just her looks, but the way she walked, her mannerisms—stiff, without a hint of joy.
But it was a cloudy kind of recollection—he couldn’t remember her name or what she had to do with the Maze, but she seemed familiar.
I know her, Thomas thought.
As she walked toward the group, she neither smiled nor frowned—it was almost as if she didn’t notice or care they were standing there.
Her brown hair was cut at the shoulder, and she had a thin face with dark eyes.
She seemed very ordinary, wearing black pants and a button-down white shirt with a logo on the breast—wicked spelled in blue capital letters.
An actual grown-up.
One was a woman.
Instead, two people walked into the room.
Thomas waited without breathing, braced himself for something horrible to come flying through the door.
The beeping stopped, and a silence as deep as outer space settled on the chamber.
He did as well; his heart quickened when he saw that one of the doors was swinging open toward them.
Then, out of the corner of his eye, he noticed the other Gladers looking in the direction of the doors.
But nothing had changed.
He craned his neck as he scanned the place top to bottom, trying to find the source of the beeps.
And scared.
For some reason everyone looked at Thomas; he shrugged in answer—he’d only remembered so much, and now he was just as clueless as anyone else.
"What now?" Chuck asked, not hiding the concern in his voice.
It came from everywhere, booming and echoing throughout the chamber.
"They’re probably coming right—"A loud, slow beeping sound cut him off, like the warning alarm of a huge truck driving in reverse, but much more powerful.
"What are they waiting on?""They’ve probably revved the Grievers back up," Newt said.
"What do we do?" Thomas asked.
"I’m gonna break your faces!" he screamed, so loudly Thomas almost held his hands over his ears.
"The Creators," Minho said; then he spat on the floor.
"Who are those people?" Chuck whispered, but his voice echoed throughout the chamber with a raspy edge.
Another man reached up and scratched his nose—the most human thing Thomas had seen any of them do.
They continued to stare at the Gladers; a man shook his head, a woman nodded.
None of them wore any kind of discernible facial expression—they were all sallow and gaunt, miserably sad to look upon.
They all wore black coats over white shirts, a word stitched on their right breast—he couldn’t quite make out what it said.
Thomas watched one of them look down to write something, another reach up and put on a pair of glasses.
A deathly silence sucked the life out of the air as every last Glader stared at the row of windows, at the row of observers.
Thomas took a step backward, noticing others doing the same.
The Creators.
The people who’d taken their lives away from them.
They were the people who’d sent them all to the Glade.
But Thomas knew they were not, of course, ghosts.
Angry, starving, sinister apparitions of people who’d never been happy when alive, much less dead.
Thomas shuddered, terrified—they all looked like ghosts.
Behind each one, a person—some men, some women, all of them pale and thin—sat observing the Gladers, staring through the glass with squinted eyes.
Directly in front of them, a row of twenty or so darkly tinged windows stretched across the compound horizontally, one after the other.
Goose bumps broke out all over him, a creepy fear trickling down his spine like a wet spider.
"Look!" someone shouted, but he’d already seen it, his breath catching in his throat.
Across from that on the other side stood large glass doors, although the lighting made it impossible to see what was on the other side.
On one side of the room—to his right—there was a row of forty or so large white pods that looked like enormous coffins.
From top to bottom, side to side, the place was covered in all kinds of machinery and wires and ducts and computers.
They were in a huge underground chamber big enough to hold nine or ten Homesteads.
Thomas had seen glimpses of it during the Changing, but didn’t truly remember it until that very moment.
As he gaped, he saw, also, that everyone else had pulled themselves together into a group, taking in the new surroundings.
He sat up, rubbing both hands on the ground, and he finally got a good look at where they’d arrived.
wasco covered in slimy filth.
Still shuddering from the experience, he wiped at his mouth with his hand, only to realiDoczeit.
Thomas wiggled his arms and legs to scoot away from Teresa, then crawled a few more feet to throw up, emptying his stomach.
Bodies scrambled everywhere, people on top of people, groaning and squirming in confusion as they tried to push away from each other.
A second later, Thomas flew out of the tunnel and landed on her.
He was just about to turn his head to the side to throw up when Teresa let out a sharp cry—this time there was no echo.
Nausea burned in his stomach—the squishing of the goo against his body, the smell, the circling motion.
Around and around they went down the tube.
Time seemed to stretch out, endless.
They were still falling.
The tunnel began to twist, turning in a rough spiral, just enough to slow them down, and Thomas’s feet smacked right into Teresa, hitting her in the head; he recoiled and a feeling of complete misery sank over him.
He started gagging; it took all his effort not to throw up on himself.
And as if his thoughts had materialized, the smells changed—to something more like mildew and rot.
He couldn’t fight off the image that they’d been swallowed by some gigantic beast and were sliding down its long esophagus, about to land in its stomach at any second.
Panic gripped Thomas’s heart.
The screams of the other Gladers echoed off the tunnel walls as they slid down the oily chute.
It was useless—the greasy stuff covered every inch of the stone; he couldn’t grip anything.
He twisted his body until he got his feet in front of him, then tried to hold his hands out to slow himself down.
His body shot down a steep decline, slick with an oily goo that smelled awful—like burnt plastic and overused machinery.
Teresa slipped down the slide with an almost cheerful shriek, and Thomas followed her before he could talk himself out of it—anything was better than the Maze.
Thomas had a strong feeling it wasn’t a way out of their nightmare; he just hoped it didn’t lead to another pack of Grievers.
Guess not.
Guess we have no choice, she said to his mind.
Teresa shone her light down on a steeply descending, slick black chute of metal.
Then it was Newt’s turn, then Chuck’s.
One by one he heard the Gladers’ dwindling shouts and hoots up ahead.
It seemed like it was a game—for whoever had built the place, at least.
"Thomas’s stomach turned at the thought.
"Looks like it ends in a slide up there, shooting downward.
Murmurs made their way down the line, and finally Teresa turned to Thomas.
Their cries faded, as if they were falling….
After a minute or so of walking, he heard a shriek from ahead, followed by another, then another.
Thomas followed, not even bothering to look back at the dead Grievers.
Even the flashlights seemed to get swallowed by the darkness.
Newt went, then Chuck, then Teresa, into the black tunnel.
No one argued.
"I’ll go last," Thomas said.
One by one they went until only he remained with Thomas and Teresa.
Newt nodded, ushering the other Gladers past him to follow.
And the older boy turned and started walking up the tunnel without waiting for a response.
"Well—let’s go," Minho answered.
He pushed it away, knowing they were nowhere near safe yet.
The losses.
co away the ache of it all—the horrors of the battle they’d just won.
" He triediDoctpush.
"I heard the door open down that way.
Thomas pointed down the long tunnel.
""Where do we go?" Minho asked.
"Right now.
Such a display of death—how could it be considered a victory?"Let’s get out of here," Newt said.
Despite the alternative, despite knowing that if they hadn’t tried to escape, all of them might’ve died, it still hurt, even though he hadn’t known them very well.
His joy dribbled away, turned into a deep mourning for the twenty people who’d lost their lives.
Too many by far .
"Too many, Thomas thought.
We’ve gotta get out of here.
And nobody got stung—just like Thomas thought.
"Half might’ve died, but half of us shucking lived.
"You know what?" Minho said, standing up a little taller.
No one said a word for a very long time.
"No one said a word then.
"Dead.
"Half of us," Newt said, his voice weak.
"The rest?" Thomas asked, terrified of the answer.
Every last one of those who’d stayed behind and fought was covered in Griever sludge and human blood, their clothes ripped to shreds.
Before long eighteen boys had joined Thomas and his friends in the tunnel, making a total of twenty-one Gladers in all.
Then Winston and others.
"Newt came through then, followed by Frypan.
I can’t believe it actually worked.
"You did it.
" He paused,taking in a really deep breath and letting it go in a rush of air.
It’s a mess of blood up there … then they all just shut down.
"We lost a ton of people….
What about everybody else?"Minho stumbled toward the curved wall of the tunnel, then leaned there, gulping big breaths.
"Are you okay?
"Minho!" Thomas shouted, filled with relief.
As if in answer to her question, someone fell through the black square—it was Minho, looking as if he’d been scratched or stabbed on ninety percent of his body.
Thomas felt his elation wither, and he stepped back and turned toward the Hole.
"Chuck’s a shucking hero!""What about the others?" Teresa said with a nod toward the Griever Hole.
I told you we needed you!" Thomas scrambled to his feet and joined the other two in a group hug, almost delirious.
"She’s right, Chuck—you saved us, man!
"Thomas laughed again, in disbelief that such a thing could be possible so soon after what they’d gone through.
"We were so worried about the stupid code words, we didn’t think to look around for something to push—the last word, the last piece of the puzzle.
"You did it, Chuck," Teresa said.
Chuck had scooted away from the Grievers, bumping into Teresa—she held him tightly, squeezing him in a fierce hug.
He gasped, then laughed, then choked on a sob before laughing again.
And that door …Thomas fell to the floor after being released by his captor’s claws, and despite the pain of several lacerations across his back and shoulders, elation surged through him so strongly he didn’t know how to react.
Almost at once the Grievers had shut down completely, their instruments sucked back through their blubbery skin, their lights turned off, their inside machines dead quiet.
Then, from somewhere down the dark tunnel, came the sound of a door sliding open.
She pushed the button and everything went perfectly silent.
And Teresa did.
"Push!" Thomas screamed, louder than he’d thought possible for a human being to scream.
A button.
The other one had gone after Chuck and was just about to swipe at the kid with a long blade.
The Griever had grabbed him with two instruments, had started dragging him backward.
Kill the Maz eMore pain snapped Thomas out of his stupor.
Three black words were printed there, so obvious he couldn’t believe he’d missed it earlier.
A small red button was set into the wall only a few inches above the floor.
But he could only stare.
He heard the Griever moan and roar behind him, felt a sharp claw grab his shirt, felt a prick of pain.
And consumed by curiosity, by a fleeting hope, Thomas joined her, collapsing to the ground to get a better look.
Before he could move, Teresa was already down there, crouching on her knees.
Chuck was pointing at a spot near the floor, right underneath the screen and keyboard.
Thomas was so surprised by the random statement that he turned away from the Grievers, looked at the boy.
The code was supposed to—"Maybe you should just push that button," Chuck said.
It was supposed to work.
Feeling his will fade into blackness, Thomas braced his feet and held up his fists halfheartedly.
The Grievers were coming, only a few feet away.
butco trying to think of a solution …I don’t get it, Teresa said.
"It won’t let us enter the word PUSH," Thomas said absently, not really speaking to iDocChuk.
"You said they’d turn off when you punched in the code!"Both Grievers had righted themselves and extended their spikes, had started moving toward them.
"What’s taking so long!" Chuck cried frantically.
As he watched, it plopped down on top of its dead brother and another Griever started entering the Hole.
Thomas turned to see him pointing at the Griever Hole—another creature was making its way through.
"Thomas!" Chuck screamed from behind them.
Nothing appeared.
"Well … why?" "I don’t know!" She tried again, then again.
Nothing’s happening!"Cold filled Thomas’s veins as Teresa’s words sank in.
But it won’t let me type in the last word.
"I put in all the words and one by one they appeared on the screen; then something beeped and they’d disappear.
She pointed at the dirty square of glass, empty but for its greenish glow of life.
He ran up to look over her shoulder and saw that she kept typing the word PUSH over and over, but nothing appeared on the screen.
"What’s the problem?" he asked, almost shouting.
He knew immediately that something was wrong.
"Wasn’t so hard," Thomas muttered, then turned to see Teresa frantically typing away at the keyboard.
He laughed, as if that one act had solved all their problems.
"You killed it," the boy said.
He glanced behind him at Chuck, standing there with eyes wide.
He’d just defeated a Griever, one of the monsters that had terrorized the Gladers for more than two years.
He absolutely couldn’t believe it.
Thomas couldn’t believe it.
A few seconds later, it stopped moving altogether.
Soon it began to slow, losing energy with every ounce of blood—or fuel—it lost.
Spikes popped in and out of the skin; its remaining arms swung around in mass confusion, at times impaling its own body.
Thomas watched in sick fascination as the Griever twitched uncontrollably, spewing the yellow oil in every direction.
Then he released the hilt of the weapon and jumped away, running back to Chuck and Teresa.
A slimy yellow goo exploded from the flesh, splashing over Thomas’s legs as he drove the spear as far as it would sink into the thing’s body.
He lifted the spear above his head, braced his feet—felt them sink into the disgusting blubber—then thrust the spear down and into the monster.
Swinging his spear wildly, he jumped on top of the creature’s bulbous body, whacking two metal arms away from him with a loud crack.
Barely hearing her, not quite understanding, he yelled out a roar and charged ahead to take advantage of the Griever’s moment of weakness.
It won’t let me enter the last word!
"These things are beatable!" Thomas shouted.
Then, from some kind of mouth that Thomas couldn’t see, the Griever let out a long, piercing shriek and pulled back again; the spikes disappeared.
With a loud clunk, and then a squishing sound, the entire arm ripped free of its socket, falling to the floor.
The spear crashed into the base of the claws.
Thomas swung, this time from above his head, throwing every bit of strength into the attack.
The Griever’s spikes appeared again; it surged ahead and another arm popped out of its skin and shot forward, this one with huge claws, snapping to grab the spear.
I’m almost done, she replied.
Just hurry!
Maybe I can hold it off, he said quickly to Teresa.
Thomas heaved breaths in and out.
The monster let out an angry shriek and pulled back several feet, its spikes retracting into its body.
It smacked the metal arm and pivoted the thing skyward, revolving in an arc until it slammed back into the body of the Griever.
When it was just a foot away, Thomas tensed his muscles and swung the spear up, around, and toward the ceiling as hard as he could.
The bladed arm moved within two feet, ready to slice his skin to bits.
He gripped the end of his spear with both hands, squeezing tightly as he lowered the knife-laced point to the ground in front of him.
A skinny metallic rod burst out of the Griever’s moist skin, unfolding into a long appendage with three spinning blades, which moved directly toward Thomas’s face.
"Just keep typing, Teresa!" he yelled.
Thomas pushed Chuck behind him and faced the creature, holding out his spear as if that would ward it off.
The thing had retracted its spikes and arms to enter—when it landed with a squishy thump, a dozen sharp and nasty objects popped back out, looking deadlier than ever.
He spun around to see a Griever plop through the Griever Hole, appearing as if by magic from the dark square of black.
Yes, I’m perfectly capable of remembering—"A loud bang from above and behind them cut her off, made Thomas jump.
"I’m not an idiot, Tom.
Are you sure you know the words?She turned to him and scowled.
Thomas called to her mind.
Wait!
She stepped up to the keyboard and screen, then started typing.
"Okay," Teresa said—Thomas knew she was too smart to waste time arguing about it.
" He just hoped the Gladers had turned their attention from making the aisle in the Maze to keeping the creatures away from the Cliff.
"Chuck and I’ll keep watch, make sure a Griever doesn’t come through the Hole.
"Hurry!"Thomas motioned for Teresa to do it.
"Put the words in!" Chuck yelled, slapping Thomas on the shoulder.
Thomas couldn’t help thinking it seemed too easy, too good to be true.
There it was, ready for the code.
Beneath it, a keyboard was set into the wall, angling out enough for someone to type on it with ease if standing.
Several feet down the tunnel, she had aimed her light at a small square of grimy glass that shone a dull green color.
"The computer’s over there," Teresa said, grabbing his attention.
Thomas peered up at the Hole through which they’d come—it looked like a square window into a deep, starless space.
It was damp, and covered in shiny, grimy oil, and it stretched out in front of them for dozens of yards before it faded into darkness.
As Thomas got his bearings, he realized they were standing in a ten- foot-high stone cylinder.
The Griever Hole would’ve been pitch-black if not for the beam of Teresa’s flashlight cutting through the darkness.
It was a miracle Thomas hadn’t stabbed someone’s eye out with his spear.
She and Chuck helped him stand.
The world went even darker around him as his feet thumped to a landing on a slippery surface, then shot out from under him; he fell backward into Teresa’s arms.
A line of icy cold shot across Thomas’s skin as he entered the Griever Hole, starting from his toes and continuing up his whole body, as if he’d jumped through a flat plane of freezing water.
Then he hit the Hole.
He pulled the spear close to his torso, pointed his toes downward, stiffened his body.
Steeling his nerves, he tapped his spear against the stone ground, then planted his left foot on the very edge of the Cliff and jumped, catapulting up and into the twilight air.
Just do your part, he told himself.
The sounds behind him were awful, horrible—he felt guilty for not helping.
Thomas tightened the straps on his backpack, held his makeshift fighting spear tightly in his right fist.
He loved him as if they had the same mom.
He loved the kid.
The boy’s bravery solidified something in Thomas’s heart.
Chuck screamed as he flew through the air, and he almost missed the target, but his feet went through; then his stomach and arms slammed against the sides of the invisible hole before he disappeared inside.
One, two, three!" He grunted with effort, heaved him over toward the Hole.
Ready?
"Push off with your legs and I’ll give you a lift.
"Before the boy could argue, Thomas grabbed him under his arms, squeezed Chuck’s torso.
"You’re next.
"Whoa is right," Thomas said.
"Whoa!" Chuck yelled, the slightest hint of his old self breaking through.
It looked as if she’d been erased from existence with one quick swipe.
Thomas held his breath until she slipped into the spot between the cut-off ivy ropes and disappeared.
After squeezing Thomas’s hand, then Chuck’s shoulder, she leaped off the edge, immediately stiffening her legs, with her arms by her sides.
To his surprise, she didn’t hesitate.
" He wanted to go last to make sure a Griever didn’t get her or Chuck.
"You first, Teresa.
Thomas hesitated, feeling one last moment of stark terror—hearing the horrible sounds behind him, seeing the illusion in front of him—then snapped out of it.
It was time to jump.
They’d then tossed the loose ends over the Cliff, until they hit the Griever Hole, where now six or seven vines ran from the stone edge to an invisible rough square, hovering in the empty sky, where they disappeared into nothingness.
Earlier, Minho and a couple of Runners had pulled out ropes of ivy and knotted them to vines still attached to the walls.
Hanging out, in the middle of thin air, were ivy vines stretching to nowhere.
In a split second, Thomas surveyed his view of the Griever Hole.
Teresa and Chuck bumped into him, almost sending all three of them to an endless fall.
co on the edge.
He skidded to a iDocstp,right.
Thomas screamed, but he kept running until they made it to the Cliff.
The sounds—clashes, clangs, screams, moaning wails, roars of engines, spinning saws, snapping blades, the screech of spikes against the floor, hair-raising pleas for help—it all grew to a crescendo, became unbearable.
Boys Thomas didn’t know ran alongside him, whacking at Griever instruments with their makeshift weapons, jumping on them, attacking.
Winston had picked up Alby’s bow and arrow, flinging the steel-pointed shafts at anything nonhuman that moved, missing more than he hit.
More Grievers came at them, more Gladers helped.
Teresa yelled, a violent echo in his head.
One almost got Chuck!
Thomas kept going.
It was Minho, desperation and fatigue radiant in his shouts.
About protecting him as he ran.
Thomas heard a distant voice, screaming the same words over and over, something about him.
A Glader cut it off, attacked it with two long swords, metal clacking and clanging as they fought.
A Griever charged in from the right, blades twirling.
Someone sprinted past Thomas, bumped him.
"I know!" Thomas shouted back, this time out loud.
Teresa said.
Just keep going!
Thomas felt his heart tremble, hoped it wasn’t someone he knew.
The scream ran on, shattering the air, overpowering the other sounds of war, until it faded in death.
He heard a shriek as he passed by, a throat- scorching wail that could only mean the Glader had lost the fight, met a horrific end.
Thomas dodged to the left, kept running.
A Griever spun directly in his path; a boy, his face hidden from sight, was clutched in its claws, stabbing viciously into the thick, whalish skin, trying to escape.
Battles clashed on both sides of them; Thomas refused to look, refused to help.
He surged ahead, pulling his friends.
There was the Cliff, opening out into a gray-dark sky, about twenty feet away.
He fought it, pushed himself forward.
The seething impossibility of their predicament was like a heavy deluge of black water flooding around him, dragging him toward surrender.
He didn’t look back, didn’t bother answering.
Even as she said it, Thomas felt a sharp stab in his leg.
Teresa screamed.
Something just sliced my arm!
They just had to make it a few dozen feet more.
FLOAT, CATCH, BLEED, DEATH, STIFF, PUSH.
Even as they ran, Thomas went through the code words again in his mind.
All was a blur, bloody and gray and flashes of steel; Thomas tried not to look left or right, only ahead, through the narrow gap formed by the Gladers.
The sounds echoing off the walls were a cacophony of terror—human screams, metal clashing against metal, motors roaring, the haunted shrieks of the Grievers, saws spinning, claws clasping, boys yelling for help.
Gladers fought, panic-induced adrenaline driving them on.
War raged around them.
Toward the Cliff.
He sprinted ahead, pulling Teresa behind him, Teresa pulling Chuck behind her, running at full speed, spears and knives cocked for battle, forward into the bloody, scream-filled hallway of stone.
"Now!" Thomas shouted.
She pointed ahead, and Thomas saw the narrow aisle forming in the middle of the corridor, Gladers fighting wildly to push the Grievers toward the walls.
Teresa shouted in Thomas’s mind—it sent a quick snap of pain shooting through his skull.
They’ve made an opening!
And, Thomas noted, not saying a word,perhaps for the first time in his life.
"  Chuck did as he was told, trying so hard to act brave.
Let’s go.
"Hold Teresa’s other hand.
"Okay, then," Thomas said.
Again, Thomas felt the pang of sadness in his heart, felt the urge to get Chuck home safely stronger than he’d ever felt it before.
"Chuck nodded quickly—too quickly.
"We need your help in the Griever Hole, in case one of those things is in there waiting for us.
Thomas quickly tried to save his dignity.
"But …" He trailed off, and Thomas knew the boy relished the idea though he was ashamed to admit it.
Chuck looked ahead at the engaged battle.
" He said it forcefully, with authority, leaving no room for doubt.
"Chuck, you’re with me and Teresa.
In that split second, he’d made a decision.
Chuck stumbled backward, then looked up at Thomas, his eyes so full of fright Thomas felt something shatter in his heart.
Just as the first sounds of boys crashing into Grievers filled the air—pierced with screams and roars of machinery and wood clacking against steel—Chuck ran past Thomas, who quickly reached out and grabbed his arm.
Thomas held Teresa’s hand, let them all go past, felt them bump him, smelled their sweat, sensed their terror, waiting for the perfect opportunity to make his own dash.
Newt went after him, right on his heels, and then the rest of the Gladers followed, a tight pack of roaring boys charging ahead to a bloody battle, weapons raised.
"Now!"The Keeper ran forward without waiting for a response.
He pointed the knife at the horde of Grievers; a flash glinted off the blade.
"Ready!" Minho yelled next to Thomas, raising his barbwire-wrapped club into the air with one hand, a long silver knife in the other.
Stick together.
I know, she replied.
He felt like a coward, but he knew that any fighting—and any deaths—would be in vain if they didn’t get that code punched, the door to the Creators opened.
Let them do the fighting—we have to get through that Hole.
We have to stay close together , he told Teresa.
He gripped his poor excuse for a spear.
What matters most is getting Thomas and Teresa to the Griever Hole!"Thomas looked away from him, back at the approaching monsters—they were only a few feet away.
Fight through the middle, push the shuckin’ things toward the walls.
"We head straight for the Cliff!
Then he turned toward the Gladers.
"Minho nodded once, a steel look of resolve hardening his features.
Do it.
"Make a bloody path for Tommy and the girl.
"We have to do something!""You lead," Newt finally said to Minho, his voice barely more than a whisper.
"They’re coming!" Teresa yelled.
The anticipation of fighting was almost worse than the fear of it.
Thomas waited for an answer as Minho and Newt exchanged a long glance.
They were even more menacing in the faded gray light.
"Somehow I have to get through that!" He nodded toward the rolling pack of Grievers between them and the Cliff—they looked like one big mass of rumbling, spiked blubber, glistening with flashes of lights off steel.
Thomas grabbed Minho by the arm.
Alby’s sacrifice had failed miserably.
Tightening their trap formation like a noose, the Grievers steadily charged toward them.
Then, in unison, the monsters moved forward, slowly, instrument-tipped appendages unfolding, pointed at Thomas and the Gladers, ready to kill.
Spikes were popping in and out of blubbery skin; their bodies shuddered and pulsed.
The creatures on both sides of their group seemed to have noticed them again.
Thomas looked up in horror.
Get them to the Cliff and the Hole so—"The sounds of the Grievers revving to life cut him off.
Number one priority is to protect Thomas and Teresa.
"Listen up!
Minho turned and faced the huddled group of Gladers.
"  Newt only shrugged, closed his eyes.
We’d be heartless if we wasted it.
He freaking sacrificed himself for us —and they aren’t attacking, so maybe it worked.
"Alby didn’t wanna go back to his old life.
Minho continued.
His stomach turned and he quickly looked away.
Thomas couldn’t help taking a peek—he saw a smear of bright red on one of the creatures’ bodies.
"Should we all dress up and have a funeral?"Newt didn’t respond, still staring at the spot where the Grievers seemed to be feeding on Alby beneath them.
"What do you want, Newt?" Minho said.
""How can you guys be so heartless?" Newt murmured, the disgust in his voice surprising Thomas.
We should only need a minute or so to punch in the code.
"Hopefully they’ll go dormant for a while.
"Thomas looked at each of the three sets of Grievers—not one had yet made a move toward the Gladers—and nodded.
Get in the Hole and do your thing—we’ll keep them off until you scream for us to follow.
"We’ll fight ’em if we have to, make a path to the Cliff for you and Teresa.
" He turned toward Thomas.
"We can’t waste what he did.
But the thought that what he’d just seen might happen to Chuck—or Teresa …Minho moved closer to Thomas and Newt, squeezed Newt’s shoulder.
And he didn’t even know if it had anything to do with Alby—he’d never much liked the guy.
Seeing Alby go down like that … a new kind of pain he’d never felt before filled his insides—an ill, disturbed pain; it felt worse than the physical kind.
"Thomas shook his head, unable to reply.
"I can’t believe he just did that.
"I can’t believe it," Newt whispered.
Thomas helped steady Newt on his feet; the Glader couldn’t stop staring at the spot where his friend had disappeared.
Totally gone.
He was gone.
Their leader had been so scared to go back to whatever he’d seen, he’d chosen to sacrifice himself instead.
Alby’d flipped once and for all, Thomas thought, fighting the urge to rid his stomach of its contents.
Newt finally gave up, collapsing backward in defeat.
Thomas lost sight of the body as he struggled with Newt, thankful for the distraction.
Somehow, impossibly, Alby didn’t scream.
"There’s nothing you can do!"Two more Grievers broke from the pack and swarmed over Alby, piling on top of each other, snapping and cutting at the boy, as if they wanted to rub it in, show their vicious cruelty.
"Are you nuts!" Thomas shouted.
"Let go!" Newt yelled, struggling to break loose.
Thomas reached out and grabbed Newt by the arms before he could go any farther, then pulled him backward.
Newt moved away from Thomas’s side and toward Alby—but five or six Grievers had already burst to life and attacked the boy in a blur of metal and skin.
Thomas started to say something himself, but Alby had already made it to the monsters and jumped on top of one.
"Alby!" Newt screamed.
"Get back here!"Instead of responding, Alby took off running—he headed straight for the pack of Grievers between him and the Cliff.
"Alby?" Newt said.
Thomas watched in detached awe—he couldn’t believe his eyes.
"Maybe I should …" He trailed off and started walking forward—in the direction of the Cliff—slowly, as if in a trance.
Seeing all these Grievers close up hit home with an explosion of reality—could they really fight them all?A long moment passed before Alby replied.
theco one-person-a-night thing was true now.
" He really iDochped.
Hate to say it, but if one of us dies, that’s better than all of us.
"Well, we’d be no better off in the Homestead.
Thomas was in no mood for whining—they had to do something.
He’d been so quiet, his voice sounded odd, especially with the hollow echo the Maze walls created.
""We shouldn’t have come," Alby said.
"I don’t understand what they’re bloody waitin’ for.
"Got any ideas?""No," he replied, his voice just the tiniest bit shaky.
Thomas looked over at Newt.
The Gladers around him stood silent, clutching their meager weapons.
He reached out and squeezed her hand.
What are they waiting for?She didn’t answer, which worried him.
Thomas called out to Teresa.
What are they doing?
Their disgusting bodies heaved in and out with mechanical wheezes of breath.
The only sounds were the eerie moans and whirrs of machinery coming from the Grievers, sitting there as if enjoying the little trap they’d set for the humans.
No one said a word.
Thomas was pressed between Newt and Teresa—he could feel Newt trembling.
The Gladers compressed into a tighter group around him, everyone facing outward, huddled together in the center of the T intersection.
A sharp pulsing pain throbbed behind his eyes.
They had no choice now—there was nowhere to go.
They were surrounded.
Thomas slowly turned in a circle, fought the fear as he took it all in.
The other two groups of Grievers had closed in and stopped just a few dozen feet from the Gladers, also waiting, watching.
Waiting, watching.
He saw the pack of Grievers between them and the Cliff, spikes extended, their moist skin pulsing in and out.
The Gladers surged toward Thomas, forming a tight group, forcing him to move out into the open intersection where the Cliff corridor met the long alley.
The enemy was on all sides, blocking them off completely.
Thomas was just about to say something when he heard sounds from the other end of the long alley—he looked to see yet more Grievers.
Maybe we can get past them—why else would they just be sitting—"A loud noise from behind cut him off—he spun to see more Grievers moving down the corridor toward them, spikes flaring, metal arms groping, coming from the direction of the Glade.
"Maybe they’ve already taken a kid back at the Glade.
Were the Creators enjoying this?He had an idea.
He wondered why the Grievers were just waiting—the beetle blades had obviously let them know the Gladers were coming.
Doubts that he could go through with it seeped into his mind and heart.
But now it was here, literally around the corner.
It’d been easy to talk about—the nothing -to-lose fight, the hope that just one of them would be taken, the chance to finally escape.
Thomas felt it himself.
" But the tremor in his voice gave him away—he was just trying to say the right thing.
Apparently Minho’s pronouncement had already been whispered through the ranks, because the first thing Newt said was "Well, we knew we’d have to fight.
Newt and Alby had moved up the line of waiting Gladers to join Thomas and the others.
He looked over at Teresa, about to say something, but stopped when he saw the expression on her pale face—he’d never seen terror present itself so starkly.
"They’re just waiting for us!"The icy chill of fear bit Thomas harder than ever before.
" He reached up and rubbed his eyes with the heels of his hands.
Maybe fifteen.
"There’s at least a dozen of them.
He didn’t even have to look—he knew what Minho was going to say before he said it.
It was as if they’d been hiding, waiting, and now were coming to life.
Griever sounds.
"Then Thomas heard it.
"Oh, no.
"Oh, no," the Keeper said through a moan.
Just like that time, Minho jerked back and turned to face him.
Thomas had seen him do that before, when they’d followed a Griever to this very spot.
Minho crept ahead and peeked around the sharp edge of stone, looking toward the Cliff.
Thomas shook his head, trying to squash the terror Minho’s expression had given him.
"Do you hear that?" he whispered.
Then he turned, a look of horror on his face.
Minho slowed at the corner, then stopped, holding up a hand to tell Thomas and the others to do the same.
Finally, after the longest hour of Thomas’s life, they reached the long alley that led to the last turn before the Cliff—a short corridor to the right that branched off like the stem of the letter T.
Thomas, his heart thumping, sweat slicking his skin, had moved up right behind Minho, Teresa at his side.
And as the time passed, Thomas let the slightest trickle of hope enter his system—maybe they’d make it before getting attacked.
On and on they ran, with no signs of Grievers.
But no one quit.
And so it went for him as they kept moving, those Gladers not used to running such distances gasping in huge gulps of air.
Wondered when the fight would begin.
What courage he’d gathered had turned to dread, and he wondered when the Grievers would finally give chase.
Every step was agonizing for Thomas.
Minho nodded and ran to the front, guiding the Gladers through all the turns necessary.
"You lead the way now," Thomas heard him say.
As if in response to the thought, Newt fell back, finally tapping Minho on the shoulder.
The group was spread out across the full width of the corridor, running at a steady but quick pace —Thomas wondered how long the non- Runners would hold up.
No, I’m just trying to be nice.
What, you don’t think I can fend for myself?Actually, he thought quite the opposite—Teresa seemed as tough as anybody there.
Ah, my Knight in Shining Armor.
Just stay close to me and Minho.
We’ll be fine.
She was right next to him, but his eyes stayed glued up ahead.
So funny, she responded.
He felt no mirth or humor and wondered if there’d ever be a time again when he would.
Can’t wait to see them.
No, I love things made out of blubber and steel.
Teresa asked him as they ran.
Scared?
One way or another, there was going to be a fight.
The sounds of shuffling feet echoed up the walls and the red lights of the beetle blades flashed more menacingly in the ivy—the Creators were certainly watching, listening.
He’d grown used to running the Maze, but this was completely different.
Thomas kept a steady pace as he ran with the other Gladers along the stone pathways toward the Cliff.
Just make it to that Hole.
You can do this, he thought.
But he kept going, determined to win.
The sudden feeling of responsibility for his friends almost overwhelmed him—made it hard to run.
co between Teresa and Chuck, hefting a big wooden spear with a knife tied at its tip.
Thomas followed, fallingiDocntoline.
The Gladers around Thomas, still cheering, picked up their weapons and ran after him, even Alby.
Into the gray air that seemed darker than the Glade, full of shadows and blackness.
We’re coming!"And with that, he turned and ran into the Maze, his limp barely noticeable.
Newt thrust his weapon into the air and yelled, "Hear that, Creators!
The game was on.
He knew they should probably be quiet, not bring any more attention to themselves, but he didn’t care.
He roared with the other Gladers.
Thomas was ready.
Tonight, they’d make their stand, once and for all.
Tonight, they’d fight.
Newt was right.
Thomas felt a trickle of courage inside him—he grasped it, clung to it, urged it to grow.
Soon shouts and battle calls broke out, rising in volume, filling the air like thunder.
"Someone cheered, and then someone else.
Tonight the Grievers better be scared.
Tonight we’re taking the fight back to the Creators, no matter what we have to go through to get there.
After two years of being treated like mice, tonight we’re making a stand.
"You all know the plan.
We’re all bloody inspired," Newt answered, then pointed over his shoulder, toward the Maze.
"Great.
" Thomas would have laughed if he could, but he was too scared for it to come out.
"Don’t die.
"Be careful," he said dryly.
Minho nodded and faced the crowd.
"Go ahead," Newt replied.
"Shouldn’t someone give a pep talk or something?" Minho asked, pulling Thomas’s attention away from Alby.
He decided to watch him carefully if he could.
Thomas felt a rising tide of worry that somehow Alby was unstable, that somehow he’d screw everything up.
A quiver of arrows hung over his shoulder.
Alby picked at the string of his bow while he stared at the ground.
"Thomas barely heard Newt, having seen Alby sulking over to the side, away from the main group of the Gladers, alone.
Simple as that.
We’re gonna fight our way through to the Griever Hole, and Tommy here’s gonna punch in his little magic code and then we’re gonna get payback on the Creators.
Other than that, isn’t a whole lot to buggin’ say— you’ve all been told the plan.
"Make sure you’ve got your weapons.
The thing looked deadly.
" He pulled the backpack he was holding onto his shoulders, and hoisted a thick wooden pole with barbwire wrapped around its tip.
"There’re forty-one of us.
When Newt finally had everyone gathered, he called for quiet, and Thomas turned to hear what he had to say.
Thomas envied him.
He looked the calmest to Thomas, the most confident, the least scared.
""Amen, sister," Minho said.
"Just anxious to get it over with.
"I’m fine," she answered with a small smile, clearly not fine at all.
"You okay?" he asked.
He looked at Teresa, who shifted from foot to foot, wringing her hands.
There was no going back.
The thought terrified him, and he pushed it aside.
Planted somehow?
What if the memories he’d had were false ones?
What if somehow he was wrong?
But he couldn’t shake the twisting feeling in his gut.
""Thanks," Thomas said.
If not, I’ll kill ya before the Grievers can.
"Thomas, this was all your idea, so it better work.
"You shanks ready?" Minho asked when they came up.
co.
Thomas found Minho and Teresa talking to each other near the left side of the Door, going overthe hastily made plans to enter the escape code once they got into the Hole.
Chuck did the same, and they headed for the West Door, the one leading to theiDocClff.
Trying not to think about it, to just act, he grabbed his backpack.
They were going.
This was it.
The icy fear and panic Thomas had experienced so often the last few days swept over him once again in full force.
In Thomas’s mind, Newt was in charge, but he could also be a loose cannon sometimes.
Alby seemed mostly himself, but Thomas still worried about the guy’s mental state.
Newt and Alby were gathering the Gladers, telling everyone it was time to go.
A commotion from the other tables caught his attention.
""Good that," Thomas agreed.
"Just get me out of the Maze, and I’ll be one happy dude.
"Well, I don’t wanna think about it," he announced.
"Chuck stood up.
" "Hey, maybe so, but we’ll find the people who care about us—you’ll see.
"Big deal—I keep hearing the world is in klunky shape.
"Chuck frowned.
You can still plan on it.
"Don’t forget my promise.
And Teresa.
But he was going to do everything possible to make sure Chuck wasn’t one of them.
People were going to die.
He’d never felt like such a liar in his life.
" Thomas ate his last bite, took a big drink of water.
"You really think that, or you just trying to cheer me up?""We can do it.
"Chuck stopped stuffing his face for a second and looked at Thomas carefully.
As long as everyone fights.
"Maybe we can all make it.
But even false hope was better than nothing.
The Creators knew the plan—they might reprogram the Grievers.
"It made Thomas sick to think people were hanging on to that hope of just one person dying; the more he thought about it, the less he believed it was true.
Better than all of us.
At least most of us will make it through—just leaves one poor sucker to die.
Maybe I sound like a shuck, but it gives me some hope.
"Well, everyone’s speculating they can only kill one of us.
He didn’t believe for a second that Chuck wasn’t scared; it almost hurt to see him acting brave.
And at least …""At least what?" Thomas asked.
At least now we’re taking it to them, trying something.
I mean, last few nights, sitting in the Homestead, just waiting for a Griever to come in and steal one of us was the worst thing I’ve ever done.
"You know, I’m really not all that scared.
" Chuck took another big bite, and seemed to think that was the best time to talk, full mouth and all.
""I bet no one’s ever called him a dude before.
The dude who figured out evolution.
"I don’t know, Darwin, maybe?
"Who am I nicknamed after?"Thomas couldn’t help shaking his head—here they were, about to embark on probably the most dangerous task of their lives, and Chuck was curious where he’d gotten his nickname.
"So … Thomas," the boy said through a huge bite of mashed potatoes.
Thomas found himself sitting next to Chuck, absently picking at his food.
The mood hanging over the Gladers as they ate couldn’t have been more somber or sodden with fear.
Just before the normal Door-closing time, Frypan prepared one last meal to carry them through the night.
"Nothing to lose," he repeated.
"Nothing to lose, remember?"Thomas remembered, but for some reason Teresa’s words fell flat—they didn’t have much hope in them.
" Teresa reached out and took his hand.
""Everyone knows what they’re getting into.
Could be a bloodbath.
Which is why I’m scared to death that what we’re about to do is a whole pile of stupid.
What does that even mean?""No idea.
WICKED is good—what I wrote on my arm.
WICKED.
World In Catastrophe: Killzone Experiment Department.
"Whoa.
Teresa crinkled her forehead in confusion for a second, but then a light seemed to blink on behind her eyes.
The metal one with words stamped on it?" Thomas’s heart had started to race with excitement.
"That sign I saw out in the Maze—remember?
He was stunned he hadn’t made the connection sooner.
For some reason, hearing the word at that moment, from someone else, knocked something loose in his mind and it clicked.
"What do you think WICKED stands for, anyway?"Thomas felt like he’d been hit in the stomach.
" Teresa broke the stick in half.
""Six code words, who knows how many Grievers.
Then we deal with the Creators—whatever it takes.
Fight the Grievers, punch in the code, escape through the door.
"Not much at all.
" Teresa yawned, as if life were completely normal.
"Not much to the plan, then.
" Thomas didn’t want to think about all the bad things that might happen.
Minho and Newt know the code words—we’ll tell them they have to get them punched into the computer if we … well, you know.
""Definitely.
"But we need backup in case somethinghappens to us.
"                      Teresa had grabbed a stick and was peeling off the bark.
"That way if we get separated, we can be in contact and still help each other.
"We have to be the ones to do it," Thomas said as they leaned their backs against craggy trees, the once-green leaves already starting to turn gray from the lack of artificial sunlight.
Once he and Teresa were done helping, they went to the secret spot in the Deadheads to strategize about the station inside the Griever Hole and how they planned to punch in the code.
A very pathetic, ill-prepared army, Thomas thought, but an army all the same.
By the end of the day, the Gladers had turned into a small army.
Wooden poles were carved into spears or wrapped in barbwire; the knives were sharpened and fastened with twine to the ends of sturdy branches hacked from trees in the woods; chunks of broken glass were duct-taped to shovels.
Thomas helped Newt distribute the weapons, and even more innovative ones were created in their desperation to be prepared for the Grievers.
Depending on how you looked at it.
Or entrance.
When Minho returned, safe and sound, Thomas thought he seemed very optimistic that it really was an exit.
Newt was right—they’d better wait until night and hope that most of the Grievers were in the Maze, not inside their Hole.
Thomas had contemplated just jumping into the Hole right away and trying to punch in the code quickly, but he had no idea what to expect or what might be waiting for him.
They had to hope the creatures would keep to their normal schedule and not come out during daytime hours.
Minho went to the Cliff with a group of Runners, taking ivy ropes and rocks to test the invisible Griever Hole one last time.
Chuck had tried to act brave from the time he first found out they were going for it, but his sweaty skin and dazed eyes revealed the truth.
Teresa helped him, and Thomas asked her to sugarcoat the trip as much as she could, even if she had to flat-out lie, which was mostly the case.
Chuck was in charge of filling water bottles and getting them out to everyone.
Syringes of Grief Serum were included, even though Thomas didn’t think the Grievers would sting them.
Frypan—Newt told Thomas that the Cook had been one of the last Keepers to agree to go—was in charge of gathering all the food and figuring out a way to distribute it evenly among the packs.
Backpacks were handed out and stuffed full of supplies.
As for Thomas and the rest of those committed to the escape, there was a ton of work to be done.
Eventually, they gave up and kept their distance.
They mainly walked around sulking, trying to tell others how stupid they were.
Those who decided to stay in the Glade were few but adamant and loud.
Though no one admitted it, Thomas bet most of them were banking on the theory that only one person would be killed by the Grievers, and they figured their chances o f not being the unlucky sap were decent.
Even Alby decided to make the run.
Most of the Gladers ended up agreeing to go—even more than Thomas would’ve guessed.
"The next few hours were frantic.
Let’s get to work.
"Good that.
Newt clapped him on the back.
However, if there was one thing his gut told him, it was not to admit to any doubt.
But whether one person or many would die, he had no clue.
" Thomas knew he was right about the Hole, the code, the door, the need to fight.
""I am.
"If you’re right.
What’s the difference?" He pointed at Thomas.
Go, one shank’ll die.
"Like you said—stay here, one shank’ll die tonight.
Newt folded his arms again, looked at him closely.
Or at least sound like he was.
co to lighten up the situation.
"You sure make it sound easy," he finally said, tryingiDochsbest.
Even with that much on his shoulders he had to fight the rising flood of panic he felt.
"Thomas was more than fine with lying low—finding that computer station and punching in the code was more than enough responsibility for him.
We’ll leave the code business to you and Teresa—you can handle that from the background.
So just lay low, okay?
Thomas, I’d put you in charge since it was your idea, but it’s going to be hard enough to get people on our side without making the Greenie our leader—no offense.
Then we go.
Food, weapons, all that.
Get ready.
"Figure out who’s going, who’s staying.
Newt took a deep breath.
"So what’s next?" Teresa asked.
Some Gladers stomped away, but most seemed to listen and at least consider.
"Thomas looked around at the arguments breaking out across the Glade, Keepers doing their best to convince people they should take a chance and battle their way through the Griever Hole.
"Anything’s better than this place.
""Yeah, well," Teresa murmured.
Or at least find him a home.
I promised Chuck I’d get him home, you know.
"Well, maybe we can.
"Thomas shrugged.
Tell him we’ll all find a new life in another part of the world, live happily ever after.
"I’ll make up some klunk.
"How are you going to convince him?"Newt laughed.
"Thomas wished he could bring back memories of those things that were tormenting Alby, but there was nothing.
But I’ll get him to go with us, don’t worry.
"I’m convinced that bugger really is more scared to go back home than he is of the Grievers.
"What about Alby?""Who knows?" Newt responded, looking around the Glade, observing the Keepers and their groups.
Asking them to fight the Grievers was asking a lot.
"Thomas didn’t doubt people would blanch at the thought of making a run for it.
"Some’ll stay and take their chances—guarantee it.
"Not all of them," Newt said, and Thomas could see the frustration in his eyes.
"You think they’ll go for it?" Teresa asked, finally standing to join them.
"Thomas knew that would be even more difficult than persuading the Keepers had been.
"Now we just have to convince the Gladers.
" He turned and looked at the Keepers, who’d started to gather their respective work groups.
Gotta try something.
We can’t get out of the stupid Maze.
Those shanks’ve seen what happens at night with those bloody Doors open.
Wasn’t as hard as I thought it’d be.
"All of them.
"So they agreed to go?"Newt nodded.
Thomas stood up, feeling a rush of excitement flooding his body.
"This is bloody nuts, you know that, right?" His face was impossible to read, but there seemed to be a hint of victory in his eyes.
Newt finally came to a halt and crossed his arms over his chest as he looked down at them sitting on the bench.
Thomas noticed he’d let go of Teresa’s hand without thinking about it.
The Keeper spotted them and approached at a limping run.
When Newt came out of the Homestead he knew that the time for rest was over.
Thomas was almost sad when the Gathering finally ended.
He felt the slightest hint of peace, as fleeting as it was, and tried to enjoy it for however long it might last.
"Thomas didn’t respond, and for a long time they just sat there, holding hands, no words spoken, in their minds or aloud.
You should be scared.
" "Holy crap, you’re human.
"Holy crap, I’m scared.
Hearing her say that only made him worry more.
"We can do it," she said in a quiet voice.
He wanted to be able to protect his friends from the horrible experience, but he knew he couldn’t.
" It especially terrified him to think about Chuck and Teresa out there—he’d faced the Grievers down already and knew all too well what it was like.
It doesn’t sound so good now.
"But Newt thinks we should go tonight.
"The plan was easy to talk about," he said after he’d told her everything.
Thomas did, reciting every word he’d told the Keepers, hating how Teresa’s eyes filled with worry—and terror.
"Tell me," she said.
He squeezed back, so hard he knew it must’ve hurt.
She reached out and took his hand.
Sooner than Thomas expected, Teresa had found him and was sitting next to him, her body pressed against his despite plenty of room on the bench.
He tried not to think about it.
And then all bets were off.
Maybe the Creators would just reprogram the creatures.
The absolute best-case scenario was that only one of them would die—but even that couldn’t be trusted.
He knew it was dangerous, but the idea of actually fighting the Grievers—not just running from them—was terrifying.
The reality of what he had suggested, the plan Newt was trying to convince the Keepers to accept, was starting to hit him.
Thomas’s stomach tightened into a knot.
I’ll be there in a few minutes.
Just come out here and we can talk more about it.
I think we’re leaving tonight.
You’re right.
He could feel her resolve.
Another pause, this one longer.
Well, we have to try.
Doubtful.
We can do this.
He punched his right fist against his other hand, even though he knew she couldn’t see him.
It’s gonna be awful.
Thomas thought for a second, then added, Unless you’ve got any better ideas?No.
I figured it was something like that.
A pause.
Use that code to shut the Grievers down and open a door out of here.
We gotta go through the Griever Hole.
What is it?Thomas leaned back on the bench and put his right foot up on his knee, wondering how Teresa would react to what he was going to say.
I’ll tell you the plan; I think it’s on.
Good.
Thomas realized how badly he needed her company.
I’ll come in a minute.
Where are you?By the Box.
Can you hear me?Yeah, she replied.
Frustrated, worried, tired of his thoughts, he called out to Teresa.
Besides the fact that the Grievers were attacking every night, the Glade had basically shut down.
Still—what other choice did they have?
Thomas didn’t remember anything like that, but if it was all true, the world they were trying to get back to didn’t sound so good.
The older boy had also mentioned burned earth and a disease.
He kept thinking of what Alby had said about the Flare, and what it could mean.
Thomas, a little shocked at the last statement, left the Homestead and walked to an old bench near the Box and took a seat, his mind a whirlwind.
" And before Thomas could say anything, Newt disappeared back into the Gathering.
"We should do it tonight, before anyone else is killed.
Newt smiled, a barely-there crack in his worried grimace.
He turned to look at Newt and nodded.
" Thomas agreed with him—he just hoped Newt could convince the Keepers.
""Good that.
canco hope that a lot of the Grievers might be out and about in the Maze—not in that Hole of theirs.
We.
"If I can convince those shanks—and that’s a big if—the best time to go would be at nightiDoc.
"Tommy?" "Yeah?" He stopped, but didn’t look back.
"Well, ain’t that just cheery?"Thomas turned to walk away, but Newt called out to him.
"Newt frowned.
If someone’s going to die every night anyway, we might as well use it to our advantage.
I was just trying to make the point that it’s worth the risk.
"Loud and clear.
You hear me?"Thomas held his hands up, overwhelmed with relief.
If we’re gonna do this, we’ll take our chances—all of us.
"But listen to me—I don’t want another buggin’ word about you dying and all that heroic klunk.
" He held up a finger.
Might as well fight the Grievers rather than sit around letting them pick us off one by one.
"But I’m going back in there to convince those shanks we should go through the Griever Hole, just like you said.
" He paused.
And I can’t bloody believe I’m about to say this.
You just don’t have an ounce of lying in those eyes of yours.
"I actually believe you.
"You know what’s funny, Tommy?" "What?" Thomas replied, wary.
"Newt stepped back, slowly shaking his head.
To redeem myself.
"I just … feel like I need to save everyone.
Thomas bore the responsibility anyway— and it was growing heavier the more he thought about it.
What anyone said.
"But it didn’t matter what Newt said.
You’re a kid—you can’t help what they forced you to do.
"If you really did help design the Maze, Tommy, it’s not your fault.
"Newt frowned, his eyes suddenly filled with compassion.
"Anyway, I’m going no matter what, so you better not waste it.
" He stopped, took a breath to compose himself.
In some ways it’s my fault we’re here in the first place.
Noble himself, aren’t ya?""I have plenty of my own reasons.
"Mr.
"Oh, really?" Newt asked, seeming irritated.
Open the door.
But deep down, he held on to the hope that he could fight long enough for someone to punch in the code and shut down the Grievers before they killed him.
Guilt that he’d somehow helped design the Maze.
" Thomas meant it, but only because of the guilt that racked him.
""I’m perfectly willing to do it.
"Yeah, I especially loved the bit where you volunteered to get yourself killed.
"Newt got in his face and spoke in an angry rasp of a whisper.
We’re meant to.
It’s the only way out of here—we can do it, I swear.
"You gotta believe me, Newt.
"He started to turn around, but Thomas reached out and grabbed him.
When we’re done, you and I’ll talk.
"Wait for me by the Box.
" They had reached the door and Newt gave him a gentle push outside.
We need to talk and decide what to do— without you here.
Why?""Think you’ve said enough for one meeting.
"Leaving?
"Thomas was stunned.
Now.
"You’re leaving.
Newt very calmly stood up, walked over to Thomas and grabbed him by the arm; he pulled him toward the door.
"The meeting erupted into a chorus of arguments.
"Me.
"Who?"Thomas folded his arms.
""Oh, yeah?" Winston asked.
"And it seems obvious who the poor kid should be.
" He ignored the glare that got him.
"Yes, Winston, I’m glad you’re so good at paying attention.
This is your brilliant suggestion?"Thomas refused to admit how bad that sounded, but an idea hit him.
"So your suggestion is that we throw some poor kid to the wolves so the rest of us can escape?
"Excuse me?" Winston asked.
"The room went silent until the Blood House Keeper barked a loud laugh.
cobe how it’s supposed to happen.
I think thisiDocmght.
So somebody can sacrifice himself to save the others while we run to the Hole.
I think we finally know for sure that the Grievers are programmed to only kill one of us each day.
""It doesn’t do the Creators any good if we all die—this thing is meant to be hard, not impossible.
"Can’t wait to hear it.
""Yeah?" Newt asked, rolling his eyes.
Plus, we might have one thing going for us.
But that part will be over.
"I don’t think they’ll sting us—the Changing was a Variable meant for us while we lived here.
"He’d been dreading it, but Thomas knew it was time to tell them the last part of his plan.
The Creators’ll know when we make our run for it.
Every last one of them might be waiting for us when we get to the Cliff —the beetle blades are out there constantly.
Even if we don’t die, we’ll probably all get stung.
"And you think we can fight off Grievers?
"Newt’s grin had no humor in it.
Then we can face the Creators themselves.
We’ll have passed the tests.
If we can fight off the Grievers long enough for someone to punch in the code and shut them down, then we can go through the door they come through.
And I’m sure Teresa’s in.
Looks like Minho will, too.
"I’m going through the Hole or I’ll die trying to get there.
Thomas spoke again once things settled.
Newt finally screamed for them to shut up.
"The other Keepers burst out in argument, everyone talking over everyone else.
Might as well slit our wrists.
Can’t get out of the Maze, and this idea of hanging with the Grievers at their bachelor pad sounds as stupid as anything I’ve ever heard in my life.
"You shanks are driving me nuts.
"Frypan snorted.
If some of us die, so be it.
Go through the Griever Hole and escape.
But for now we gotta do what they planned.
We can deal with the Creators once we’re out.
"Anything’s better than dying here.
What in the world is the Flare?""I don’t care," Minho said.
"He’s never been the same since being stung— must’ve been one bugger of a memory.
Newt let out a deep breath and shook his head.
" And with that, he walked to the door and left the room.
We’ll die no matter what.
"Doesn’t matter.
" He sighed.
"Do what you want.
"Alby stood again, his face showing his defeat.
"We still live inside the world you remembered.
He turned to Alby then, and looked at him gravely.
""Inside the Maze or out of it," Thomas added, relieved that Minho was firmly on his side.
If we’re gonna die, let’s freakin’ do it fighting.
I’m with Thomas one hundred percent.
I’m with Thomas.
"Man, you are one butt-load of sunshine, let me tell you.
"Minho snickered and leaned back in his chair.
Better to die than go home.
"It’s worse.
"Yes," Alby finally said.
But he was certain he hadn’t remembered anything about that when he’d gone through the Changing.
Something about it was familiar, right on the edge of his mind.
The Flare.
Thomas could only think of the words he’d just said.
"It’s worse than that?"Alby stared at Minho a long time before answering.
""If we stay here, we’ll all die!" Minho yelled.
It was horrible—way worse than we have it here.
Burned land, a disease— something called the Flare.
I’ve seen it, remembered awful, awful things.
"We can’t go back to where we came from.
" Alby sounded like he was begging—near hysterical.
"I’m telling you.
It didn’t matter.
Thomas knew why Newt wasn’t mad—the Maps were safe, the code figured out.
Newt, instead of showing anger, asked Alby to explain.
cohe acted as if he hadn’t even heard.
" Thomas looked to see how Alby would respond to Minho’s sarcastic, almost cruel, remark,iDocbut.
"Thanks for the tip you gave us after the Changing—to protect them.
"Well, it’s a good thing we saved those Maps," Minho said, completely straight-faced, almost mocking.
Alby remembered how awful his life was before he came here and he didn’t want to go back.
For Thomas, though, it all made sense now.
I did it!"The Keepers exchanged looks, shock clear in their wide eyes and raised eyebrows.
I slammed my head on the table so you’d think it was someone else, I lied, burned it all.
I did it.
"I burned the Maps.
Alby looked up, his eyes wet with tears.
He looked as confused as Thomas felt.
""Did what?" Newt asked.
"I did it.
"What’s going on?" "I did it," Alby said through a racking sob.
"Alby, talk to us," Newt pressed, not willing to let it drop.
The fearless leader of the Gladers was crying.
Thomas couldn’t have been more surprised.
But he stopped, lowered his arm, then went over and sank into his chair, put his face in his hands, and broke down.
"Are you kidding?"Alby turned on him, fiercely, even held up a clenched fist.
"I’ve seen what our lives were like—we can’t go back!""Is that what this is about?" Newt asked.
"We can’t go back!" he finally yelled, turning to look at everyone in the room.
His eyes watered and veins popped out on his neck.
Do I need to show you the cuts and bruises all over my body?"Alby said nothing, his face still quivering with rage.
""I did it," Thomas said, throwing all the annoyance he could into his voice, "on the chance that I could get my memories back, help all of us get out of here.
"Maybe.
You think that’s part of the act?"Alby nodded once, curtly.
He just about got freaking torn apart three nights ago.
"That’s about the dumbest theory I’ve ever heard.
"Alby," Minho finally interjected, relieving Thomas.
Something was odd here—suspicious.
"Thomas’s anger lessened slightly at that, turned into pity.
If you’re in league with the shucks who sent us here, you wouldn’t have had to worry about the Grievers hurting you—maybe it was all an act.
I risked my life to save you out in the Maze—you’d be dead if it wasn’t for me!""Maybe that was a trick to gain our trust.
"Alby, do you have a short- term memory problem?
Why should we trust you?"Thomas stared, incredulous.
"For all we know you were sent here to get us all killed.
Why would I make all this up?"Alby’s arms stiffened, fists clenched.
Nothing!
"What am I up to?
What are you really up to?"Thomas was furious.
We can’t handle one Griever on our own ground, much less fight a whole horde of them in their little hole.
How can we trust a word you say if you helped design this place, put us here!
"Or a traitor.
"Now you’re being a shuck idiot," he said, glaring at Thomas.
He took two steps forward before stopping, as if he’d been about to charge and attack Thomas.
His bloodshot eyes stood out against the white bandage on his forehead.
"Alby stood up so quickly his chair fell over backward.
"We have to go through the Griever Hole.
"Over the Cliff," Thomas answered.
"So where is it?" Newt asked, leaning forward in his chair.
The odds of everyone surviving were slim.
" He wanted to make sure they understood the stakes.
The final test.
All of them.
"The Grievers will come after us whenever we try to do it.
"Well, where is it?""It’s almost suicide," Thomas said, knowing he was putting off the answer.
"Minho stood up.
"What do you think we’ve been doing for two years?""Trust me, you’ve never been to this spot.
""A place we’ve never looked before?" Alby asked.
It also shuts down the Grievers so they can’t follow us—if we can just survive long enough to get to that point.
The code will open a door for us to get out of the Maze.
"There’s a computer station in a place we’ve never looked before.
The rest of what he had to say almost seemed easy now.
He’d been sure they’d put him under major heat for his confession, if not throw him off the Cliff.
He was so relieved he almost couldn’t speak.
"A lump formed in Thomas’s throat.
""Whatever," Minho said, "who gives a klunk about all that—just get on with the escape already.
And they’ll be sorry.
"The Creators—those shanks did this to us, not Tommy and Teresa.
Then he looked up, took in the other Keepers.
"Newt shook his head back and forth, staring at the ground.
Anyway, I wanted you to know the truth, to know there’s a chance we can do this.
theco final pieces of the puzzle.
I guess I needed the Changing iDoctadd.
But the Creators have seen enough—it’s time for the final test.
Teresa and I were sent here just like anyone else, and we can die just as easily.
"But I can tell you this—I’m in the same boat with you now.
"It’s true, and I’m sorry," Thomas continued.
And for some odd reason, Minho was smiling.
Most of the Gladers continued to stare blankly at him or shook their heads in wonder or disbelief.
"Thomas looked around, and surprisingly, astonishingly, no one seemed angry.
Whatever the reason, with your Maps we figured out the code and we need to use it now.
Maybe we were meant all along to be the ones to reveal how to escape.
"Maybe it was to see if we could gain your trust despite having been a part of them.
I don’t know how or why, but they did.
"They forced us to help.
"But listen to me," Thomas continued, in a hurry to defend himself.
Newt blinked in surprise; someone coughed.
We can talk to each other in our freaking heads!" Saying it out loud almost made him feel ashamed, as if he’d just admitted he was a thief.
"Spit it out!""We’re telepathic!
"Speak!" Newt yelled.
" He stopped, knowing it must all sound absurd.
But most importantly, Teresa and I have a … gift that made us very valuable as they designed and built this place.
And I think it might be part of the Variables.
"We were … smart.
As crazy as it was, he knew it for the truth.
How could you have created the Maze?"Thomas couldn’t help doubting it a little himself—but he knew what he’d remembered.
"You’re a bloody sixteen-year-old.
"What’s that supposed to mean?" Newt finally asked.
Thomas figured they either didn’t understand or didn’t believe him.
Blank faces stared back at him once again.
"Everyone seemed too stunned to respond.
We helped create the whole thing.
"Teresa and I helped design the Maze.
Thomas took a deep breath, then said it.
He had to.
But he knew he had to.
"Thomas quickly scanned the faces of the Keepers, wondering one last time if he should say it, if they would understand.
So you’ll believe me when I tell you the only way we can get out of here.
But I had to tell you this myself to show you we can be trusted now.
If you had your full memories back, you’d probably want to kill us.
"Thomas, what’re you talking about?""Teresa and I were used by the Creators.
"Minho was the one to speak up now.
"We were part of the Maze Trials from the very beginning—but against our will, I swear it.
"Teresa and I are … different," he continued.
"He expected questions—an eruption of voices—but the room was dead silent.
There’s a reason Gally accused me of so much stuff, and why everyone who’s gone through the Changing recognizes me.
About me and Teresa.
"What are you talking about?""Well, first there’s something I have to share.
Newt looked completely baffled and finally broke the silence.
He felt the sweat beading on his forehead, slicking his hands; he was terrified to keep going.
"	 For a long moment, no one said anything, and all Thomas saw were blank faces.
I should know—I was there when the Creators did it.
"It was hidden in the wall movements of the Maze for a reason.
"What about it?" Thomas looked at him, paused for effect.
""The code?" Frypan repeated, his voice lighting up with a trace of hope.
"The code.
" The room fell completely silent, every eye on him.
But we have to earn it.
"The Creators want the best of us for whatever it is they have planned.
The next few minutes were going to be crucial.
He closed his eyes for a second and folded his arms.
""Probably not," Thomas said.
"Something tells me I’m not gonna like what I’m about to hear.
"Minho, who’d been mostly silent the whole time, cleared his throat.
"Shut up and listen.
"Well, you better start talking about this magical escape, then!" "He will," Newt said, quietly.
"Frypan kicked his chair.
Only the best of us will escape.
Survival of the fittest.
The only reason the Grievers are doing it one by one is so we don’t all die before it ends the way it’s supposed to.
"Yes, Frypan, killing people.
And it was only about to get worse.
That’s a nice little part of their plan?"Thomas felt a moment of fear, worried that the Keepers might take out their anger on him for knowing so much.
"And killing people?
"Frypan stood up.
In the end, they want the survivors for something important.
See if we’ll turn on each other.
They’re throwing crazy things at us to see our response, test our will.
Same thing goes for Teresa being sent here, her being used to trigger the Ending—whatever that means—the place being shut down, gray skies, on and on and on.
The Creators wanted to keep our minds working toward a solution that was never there.
We’re being used and manipulated.
All of this—the Grievers, the walls moving, the Cliff—they’re just elements of a stupid test.
"Whatever the reason, it makes me sick!
"Thomas realized his voice had steadily risen as he spoke, and he felt heat in his face.
And we’ve kept fighting no matter how hopeless it’s gotten.
We couldn’t accept that a problem can’t be solved—especially when it’s something as simple as a maze.
But I think we’re different.
Most people would’ve given up by now.
Your reaction proves my point.
"See?
Thomas held his hands up again, wishing he could just zap his thoughts into everyone else’s brains.
"Chatter broke out, questions overlapping each other.
"What I’m saying is, there is no solution.
" He paused to look around, making sure they were all listening.
All this added up to making us think there had to be a solution, just encouraging us to work all the harder while at the same time magnifying our discouragement at not finding one.
Everything was provided for us, and the problem was laid out as one of the most common puzzles known to civilization—a maze.
See if we could work together—build a community, even.
Like I said, they wanted to test us, see how we’d react to what they call the Variables, and to a problem that has no solution.
"I’m getting there.
"What’s the bloody point?"Thomas held up a hand for silence.
""But why?" Newt asked.
They put us in the Box and sent us up here—a big group to start and then one a month over the last two years.
"Okay, somehow they wiped our memories—not just our childhood, but all the stuff leading up to entering the Maze.
Thomas sucked in a big breath, as if he were about to start a race.
"Should I keep going or not?""Talk," Newt said.
""I’ll tell you in a minute why I think I learned more than others," Thomas said, dreading that part of the story.
"I didn’t learn nothin’.
co through the Changing, but everything I saw was …" He looked around quickly, like he’d just said something he shouldn’t have.
iDocI’vebeen.
"But I don’t get why none of us remembered this stuff.
That we live on an alien planet?" "Just keep talking," Alby said.
"Better yet, what do you think is the explanation?
He’d gotten stung on purpose to remember these things!
"Why would I make this up?" Thomas said, his voice rising.
""I believe this klunk about as much as I believe Frypan’s food is good for you," Winston grumbled, looking tired and indifferent.
Plus, some of us have had things … altered in our brains.
No wonder we have so many beetle blade spies running around this place.
Seeing who’d survive it all.
Seeing who’d give up and who wouldn’t.
"Supposedly we’re really smart and they’re studying every move we make, analyzing us.
"That we’re freakin’ orphans raised by scientists?""Yes," Thomas said, hoping his expression didn’t give away just how depressed he felt.
" "What are you saying?" Frypan asked.
"As far as I can tell, we’ll probably never know what our names were.
"Our names … these ain’t even our real names?" Thomas shook his head.
"Alby looked like he’d been slapped in the face.
As in Edison.
All our names are just stupid nicknames they made up—like Alby for Albert Einstein, Newt for Isaac Newton, and me—Thomas.
But after we were taken, we spent the next few years learning in special schools, living somewhat normal lives until they were finally able to finance and build the Maze.
"I can’t remember anything about my family or what happened to them.
I don’t know, most of this is sketchy and doesn’t matter that much anyway.
Somehow they figured out that we have above-average intelligence, and that’s why they chose us.
The Creators stole us, and I think they felt justified in doing it.
I have no idea what.
I don’t remember how or why—just glimpses and feelings that things had changed in the world, that something really bad happened.
"Every single one of us was taken when we were really young.
"Let me start over," Thomas said, rubbing his eyes.
"What?" Newt asked.
" He trailed off, already confused at what order he should tell things in.
They want the winners—or survivors—to do something important.
It’s all been a trial.
The Maze was never meant to be solved.
The Creators are testing us.
"But I remember enough.
" He paused, gathering his thoughts one last time.
Other stuff has faded or is fading.
A lot came back to me, but only some of it’s clear enough to talk about.
When I went through the Changing, I saw flashes of images—hundreds of them—like a slide show in fast forward.
"We don’t have time to go through it all, but I’ll tell you the gist of it.
"It’s a long story," he began.
He had a lot to say, but wanted to be sure it came out sounding as non-stupid as possible.
"Thomas, still a bit queasy from the Changing, forced himself to take a second and gain his composure.
Start talking.
"Forget all the beat-around-the-bush klunk.
The other chairs were all occupied except two—a stark reminder that Zart and Gally had been taken by the Grievers.
"All right, Greenie," Alby said, looking much better as he sat in the middle of the semicircle of chairs, next to Newt.
Newt and Minho trusted her now, but the others still had their doubts.
They hadn’t let Teresa in, which ticked him off just as much as it did her.
"An hour later, Thomas sat in front of the Keepers for the Gathering, just like he had a week or two before.
Call the Gathering.
You know a way out?" "Yeah.
"What do you mean?
"Newt’s brow crinkled in confusion.
To escape.
Now it’s time for the last test.
Sending Teresa here and shutting everything down was only the last part, one more … final analysis.
Testing our ability to hope and fight.
Throwing variables at us, trying to make us quit.
They’re weeding us out, seeing if we’ll give up, finding the best of us.
"No, you don’t get it.
"Thomas shook his head.
"Like an experiment.
"Newt nodded.
What did you figure out?""It’s a test, Newt—the whole thing is a test.
But why?
" "Yeah, Chuck told me—we’ll do it.
"Before I start forgetting some of this stuff.
Surprisingly, he didn’t feel much pain, just wooziness.
Anything that’ll help?"                           "We need to have a Gathering," Thomas said, shifting his legs to get more comfortable.
What memories came back?
"I know why you did it.
" He paused, shook his head.
Seems like you’re pretty good at that.
"What you did was half brave and half bloody stupid.
"Newt shook his head, his face a mixture of anger and awe.
Thought it’d be a lot worse.
"I feel a little queasy, but other than that, I’m fine.
" Thomas nodded.
"Tommy—you barely look sick.
Newt had walked over to the bed and sat down next to him.
she said, then was gone.
Hurry!
I’ll tell you later, Thomas quickly finished.
What is it?We have to—Before he could finish, Newt walked into the room, cutting him off.
Sound promising?Big-time.
It’s terrible, and some of us might die.
Oh, really.
He wanted to give her some hope, no matter how scarce.
I have a plan.
Don’t worry; the Creators meant for us to escape, though.
Thomas hated the pain in her voice—he could feel it in his mind.
I think we all know that now.
She paused for a long time before answering.
Teresa?Yeah?The Maze can’t be solved.
Neither one of them said anything for a while, a sense of hopelessness wafting between their minds.
I’ll ask for you to be there—I don’t have the energy to say it all twice.
We need a Gathering.
Maybe, he finally said, but it won’t be easy.
Their only chance for escape might be a death wish.
A purpose for the code?Thomas paused, not really wanting to talk about it yet—not before he really gathered his thoughts.
she asked, as if she didn’t want to know what part she’d had in all of this.
Did you learn anything to help us get out of here?
He sensed frustration from her, like she had a million questions and no idea where to start.
What you said about the two of us and what we did to them… It was true?We did some bad things, Teresa .
Enough.
So, how much do you remember?He paused.
I guess.
Well … thanks.
Thomas felt a burst of warmth in his chest, reached up and actually touched it, surprised at himself.
That’s just my way of saying I would’ve killed you if you’d died.
She paused.
He was thrilled she’d cared so much about him.
Your skin, your veins…You hated me?
You should’ve seen yourself.
I pretty much hated you the last couple days.
Had to do it, he answered.
Really, really stupid.
That was really stupid, Tom.
She didn’t answer at first, but then her voice popped into his thoughts as clearly as if she were sitting next to him.
Teresa.
Then he called out to her with his mind.
Thomas closed his eyes and rested his head against the wall.
Do you think I’m serious?"Without a word, Chuck jumped up and ran out of the room, his calls for Newt fading the farther he went.
"Chuck, I just went through the Changing.
""Serious?"Thomas let out a sigh.
Soon as possible.
"Tell them we need to have a Gathering.
"Get Newt and Alby," he finally said in answer.
Enough to know that sometimes knowing sucked.
Why do you think the Grievers are only taking one shank at a time?"Thomas’s stomach turned sour—he knew the exact answer to that question, and some others now.
But nothing.
Minho and the Runners have scoured the Maze, trying to find an exit or some use for that stupid code you guys came up with.
One a night.
"Yeah— they got Zart and a couple others.
"Did the Grievers come?"Chuck’s jubilation visibly crashed to the ground as his eyes sank down toward the floor.
But check you out—you look brand-new!"Thomas could only imagine how non-great he looked.
Thought you were dead for sure about thirty times since you started.
"We put you in the Slammer at night to keep you safe—brought you back here during the days.
"Three days," Chuck answered.
"How long did it take?" he asked.
Soreness ate at his joints and muscles.
" Thomas opened his eyes again and forced himself to sit up in the bed in which he lay, pushing his back against the wall and stretching out his legs.
""Please don’t do that, Chuck.
You’re lucky I don’t give you a big kiss.
""Sorry—I’m just glad you’re alive.
I don’t feel so good.
"Chuck, do you have to scream?
"Thomas is awake!"The booming sound of his voice made Thomas wince; he shut his eyes again.
"He’s awake!" the boy yelled to no one in particular.
Despite it all, despite the terrible crappiness of it all, Chuck smiled.
But then they lit up and a smile spread across his face.
Chuck’s pudgy face was there, staring with frightened eyes.
Groaning, he forced his eyes open, squinting at first.
He was crushed with despair.
Something terrifying.
Their only way out was something they’d never expected.
The Maze couldn’t be solved.
Memories.
The Glade, the Grievers, the stinging needle, the Changing.
"Everything came crashing back into his mind.
Please don’t die, dude.
Are you okay?
"Thomas, it’s Chuck.
He did nothing.
He sensed light on the other side of his eyelids, but knew it would be unbearable to open them.
His mind had shut down when it could no longer take the pain; he feared it would all return if he allowed himself back into consciousness.
"Thomas, can you hear me?"He didn’t want to answer.
"The voice was distant, warbled, like an echo in a long tunnel.
"Thomas.
Everything else turned into pain.
And then it consumed him; he felt his mind taken by the mist, felt memories flood into his thoughts.
Where seconds before he’d been able to see the distinct form of the funnel, he now could see only a flat expanse of white.
The tower of thick mist began to move toward him—or he was moving toward it, he couldn’t tell —increasing its speed at an alarming rate.
He felt the gales then, sucking into the cyclone so that it blew past him from behind, ripping at his clothes and hair like they were shredded flags caught in a storm.
Then a swirling mist of whiteness appeared far in the distance—a spinning tornado of smoke that formed into a long funnel, stretching out until he could see neither the top nor the bottom of the white whirlwind.
A distant wind picked up, unfelt but heard.
Finally, after an interminable wait, things began to change.
Fear turned into curiosity, which turned into boredom.
And on.
Time stretched on.
It was as if someone had stolen his five senses, leaving him in a vacuum.
He saw nothing, heard nothing, smelled nothing.
He floated in emptiness, stared into a void of black.
But this time he had no sensation of anything touching his feet or body.
It started much like his first memory of the Box—dark and cold.
" Thomas had no concept of time as he went through the Changing.
"I did it on purpose….
"Don’t worry," he whispered, hoping they could hear him.
It took all of his effort, but he said one last thing before the darkness took him for good.
The room spun, colors morphing into each other, churning faster and faster.
But the world still seemed to be collapsing in on itself, and he knew it would all be gone from him in just a few seconds.
Warmth spread from that point throughout his body, calming him, lessening the pain.
Newt yelled for the Grief Serum; a minute later Thomas felt a pinprick on his arm.
Why would you do that?Because… He didn’t have the strength to concentrate.
Why, Tom?
Teresa was by his feet, squeezing his right ankle with her hand.
A Med-jack said something about him being stung dozens of times.
He heard Chuck’s voice, couldn’t help feeling relief that his friend was okay.
"Don’t waste your energy!"Thomas felt someone examining his arms and legs, ripping his clothes away from his body, checking for damage.
co"Shut up!" Newt shouted.
".
"No … Newt … you don’t understandiDoc….
"How could you be so bloody stupid!" Thomas had to speak before he faded into blackness.
"What were you doing!" Newt yelled in his face.
The world continued to twist and pitch.
Someone, he couldn’t tell who, obeyed Newt’s order; he was being carried across the courtyard, through the front door of the Homestead, down the shattered hall, into a room, placed on a couch.
Thomas felt the world swimming around him, felt delirious, nauseated.
"Get his legs!" he yelled.
Newt grabbed him by the shoulders and lifted him up, gripping him under both arms.
Newt was on him in a second, followed immediately by Chuck, Teresa, several others.
Thomas collapsed to the ground, groaning from the pain.
As soon as he escaped the immediate reach of the Grievers’ instruments, they gave up and retreated, disappearing into the Maze.
Struggling, bursting with adrenaline, he finally found an open spot to get his feet under him and ran with all his power.
Screaming, he kicked and pushed and thrashed, throwing his body into a roll, trying to get away from them.
Their relentless attack intensified, and Thomas felt pain erupt over every inch of his body—needle pricks that told him he’d succeeded.
Thomas flailed his arms and legs, knocking away the horrible metallic arms as he kicked at the pulsating blubber of the Grievers’ bodies—he only wanted to be stung, not taken like Dave.
Three of the Grievers swarmed on him at once, their long pincers and claspers and needles flying in from all directions.
Teresa’s scream inside his mind was so loud it felt as if a dagger had been driven through his skull.
Thomas jumped on the one holding Dave, tried to jerk the kid free, hoping the creature would retaliate.
Having been taken by surprise, the Grievers hesitated.
Without hesitating, knowing the others would think he was trying to commit suicide, Thomas sprinted in their direction until he found himself in the middle of the pack of creatures.
The other Grievers had already gathered in the courtyard and followed their companion toward the Maze.
The Griever holding Dave—a kid Thomas had never spoken to—was rolling along on its spikes toward the West Door, churning and whirring.
He just kept running.
What are you doing!He ignored her.
Teresa screamed inside his head.
Tom!
He headed straight for it and ran out into the Glade.
He could see that where the front door had been there now stood a jagged hole leading out into the gray night.
He heard Newt yell, but he ignored him and ran down the hall, sidestepping and jumping over hundreds of splintered pieces of wood.
He jumped up and ran to the door of the room, yanking it open.
It was now or never.
An explosion of fear ripped through Thomas.
The Griever had come right through the house and was now leaving.
A second later came another explosion of ripping wood: the front door.
Thomas jumped as a terrible crash sounded right outside their door, accompanied by screams and the splintering of wood, like some iron-jawed monster was eating the entire stairwell.
Two nights in a row only one boy had been taken, and people had started to believe that what Gally had said was true.
That maybe they were safe for one more night.
No one in Thomas’s room moved a muscle; he knew each of them was probably feeling guilty about their relief—that at least it wasn’t them.
"It’s got Dave!" someone yelled, the voice high-pitched with terror.
Loud creaks and groans announced a whole horde of Gladers running to the first floor.
Thomas went numb as several screams erupted, followed by the pounding of fleeing footsteps.
A booming explosion of ripping wood and broken glass thundered from somewhere upstairs, shaking the whole house.
The air in the room seemed to freeze into solid ice, and Thomas pressed his fists against his eyes, the anticipation of the attack killing him.
More noises joined in a few seconds later, coming from all directions, the closest right outside their own window.
A distant scraping of metal against wood echoed through the house; it sounded to Thomas like a Griever was climbing on the back side of the Homestead, opposite where they were.
The Gladers were quiet, not a soul moved.
The tension in the room rose at a steady pace.
But he knew that everything might depend on it.
The reality of the dreadful decision he’d made earlier squeezed his heart like a crushing fist.
Thomas huddled in a corner next to Teresa, hugging his knees, staring at the window.
Everyone crowded together against the wall farthest from the windows, doing their best to keep quiet.
The time had come.
Then, just as they’d all expected, came the mechanical, haunted sounds of the Grievers outside.
The night dragged on, the heavy sense of anticipation like a weight on his chest.
But he had no luck.
He tried— he tried so hard to keep his eyes closed, force himself to relax.
Thomas certainly couldn’t sleep, even though he knew his body needed it desperately.
Actually sleeping.
Somehow, he could sense that she was sleeping.
She was near him, curled up in two blankets.
Unlike two nights ago, Teresa was allowed to stay in the building with the rest of the Gladers.
Silence settled over the room quickly, though he didn’t know if it was because people were actually asleep or just scared, quietly hoping against hope the Grievers didn’t come again.
Thomas ended up in the large living room on the bottom floor of the Homestead with the same people he’d slept with two nights before.
Newt and Alby, who finally felt well enough to walk around again, his head heavily bandaged, insisted on a plan for everyone to rotate where they slept each night.
The end result looked to Thomas like an army of drunk guys had done the work, but it was solid enough.
The Builders had boarded up the gaping holes left by the monsters who’d carried off Gally and Adam.
And then it was time for another sleepless night.
He barely noticed he’d been hungry until he started eating Frypan’s hastily prepared meal of biscuits and tomato soup.
Eventually, when his watch showed that evening had arrived, he went to the Homestead with everyone else.
Plus, he was absolutely terrified and he didn’t want the others to notice.
The only thing to do.
But in truth, he was psyching himself up for what he had planned for that evening, convincing himself it was the right thing to do.
Try to discover a hidden secret within his mind that would help them know what to do.
But he kept telling her he didn’t feel good, that he just wanted to be alone and sleep in his spot behind the forest, maybe spend some time thinking.
Teresa tried several times.
Thomas refused to talk to anyone the rest of the day.
On purpose.
Go through the Changing.
So he was going to get stung by a Griever.
They needed memories.
They needed more clues about the code.
As bad as it was, he had a plan.
All the same, Thomas now had a plan.
Instead, he just nodded and headed for the stairs.
He wanted to share his idea, but decided against it.
"Thomas looked at Teresa, then at Newt.
"You spent all bloody night out in the Maze—go take a nap.
"Well," Newt said, reaching out to squeeze Thomas’s shoulder.
I just need some rest.
Seriously, I’m tired.
He looked to see that she was as worried as Newt, which made him feel good.
Teresa asked in his mind.
" He rubbed his temples for effect.
My eyes are hurting—I think I need some sleep.
"Oh … nothing, sorry.
"Thomas shook his head, composing himself.
Your face just went white as a ghost.
"What’s wrong with you?
"Tommy?" Newt asked, stepping closer with a look of concern creasing his forehead.
That it was something he had to do.
But instinct told him he was right.
The worst idea in the history of horrible, terrible, awful ideas.
A horrible, terrible, awful idea.
An idea had just occurred to him.
If we just had more clues—" He froze, hit by a dizzy spell; he would’ve fallen to the floor if he hadn’t had the shelves to lean on.
"We need to get Minho down here—maybe he knows something we don’t.
"Yeah," Thomas replied with a frustrated groan.
"Cheerful, don’t ya think?" Newt said, mirroring his thoughts exactly.
That didn’t sound good.
Push.
Stiff.
Death.
Bleed.
Catch.
Float.
Without thinking about it, he’d memorized the six words, welded them to his mind.
"Thomas folded his arms and leaned against the shelves next to Teresa.
co word, and that’s the order.
So we figured that’siDocthefirst.
Each time, after the word PUSH, it goes a full week without showing any letter at all, and then it starts over again with FLOAT.
"The Maze has been repeating those words for months—we finally quit when that became clear.
Are you sure they’re in the right order?"She took the paper back from him.
"That’s all?
He looked up at Teresa with a sunken heart.
Disappointment washed over Thomas—he’d been sure the purpose of the code would be obvious once they had it figured out.
Six words.
FLO ATCATCHBLEEDDEATH STIFF PUSHThat was it.
Next to each one was a word written in big blocky letters.
There were numbered circles running down the left side, one to six.
"Thomas took the paper and scanned it quickly.
"Just don’t have a clue what it means.
"No doubt this is right," she said.
She held out the paper, eyebrows raised.
Thomas walked over to Teresa, eager to see what they’d come up with.
"I’ll get down on my knees and kiss your bloody feet if you can figure it out," Newt said.
"Come check this out," she said aloud, barely hiding the smirk that flashed across her face.
I don’t want him knowing about our … gift.
Don’t talk in my head while Newt’s around.
Thomas started, for a brief moment worried that Newt could tell what was going on.
You have to see this , Teresa said to him just as Newt dismissed his helpers—they clomped up the wooden stairs, a couple of them grumbling about doing all that work for nothing.
She was obviously busy figuring out the code.
This saddened him a little —he’d hoped she’d be happy to see him—but then he felt really stupid for even having the thought.
She glanced up when he entered, but then returned her gaze to whatever it was she held.
Teresa was leaning against a stack of shelves, reading a single sheet of paper.
It looked as if a tornado had touched down right in the middle of the room.
Piles of Maps lay scattered all over the place, including the floor.
Several Gladers he didn’t know were gathered around the table, standing; they all looked exhausted, their eyes sunken.
He pushed the thought aside as he entered the room.
"Thomas was surprised Minho was wasting time sulking, especially with the code possibilities.
"Sometimes he turns into a buggin’ hothead.
"Minho still hasn’t shown up," he said as they walked down the stairs to the basement.
Newt let him in.
He was already moving as he said it, somehow not feeling so exhausted anymore.
I’m coming.
Serious?Get down here.
Thomas’s heart leaped into his throat.
I think we have the code all figured out.
Newt had three or four Gladers help us trace the Maps.
Still here.
I saw Newt but then he disappeared again.
Are youguys still in the basement?
It’s not so bad.
Thomas thought about that—actually, he was sort of getting used to it.
Kinda freaky, huh?
Sometimes it’s choppy, but it’s working.
Am I doing this thing right?
Can you hear me?
Tom, did you say something?Yeah, he said, excited he’d made contact again.
Huh?
Did you figure anything out?After a long pause, he almost gave up, thinking it didn’t work.
Where are you?
he said in his mind, closing his eyes, as if that would do the trick.
Teresa?
And after aimlessly wandering the Glade to hear the other Runners’ stories, he snapped out of his funk.
It had to.
It had to reveal something.
Thomas knew that the code of the Maze was their only hope now.
Glum faces were everywhere throughout the Glade, and most of the workers had abandoned their daily jobs.
The other Runners returned within the hour, and from what Thomas heard, none of them had found anything and they’d eventually given up as well.
Despair hung in the air like the smoke from the Map Room, thick and acrid.
He left Thomas standing there, now in his own daze.
Newt didn’t say a word.
It worried him—if Minho gave up, they were all in big trouble.
"Thomas watched, his throat dry, as Minho stomped off toward the Homestead.
We’re all shucked.
"There’s no exit, never was, never will be.
It’s all over!" He took off his backpack and threw it on the ground.
It’s over!
"I’m sick of it!
"I’m sick of this!" Minho spat in the ivy, veins popping out of his neck.
Newt was about to say something else when Minho freaked out, startling Thomas.
Maybe Gally was right.
Just one person again, he thought.
"Thomas didn’t know the name, and felt guilty for feeling nothing.
They took Adam.
"Yeah.
Finally, he nodded.
Did the Grievers come last night?"Newt paused, darkness passing over his face.
The walls haven’t moved, no exits, nothing.
"We didn’t find anything different.
"What’s he talking about?""He’s just discouraged," Thomas said with a weary shrug.
"Newt looked at Thomas, confused.
"The Maze is a big freaking joke.
"Nothing," he said.
"Minho’s eyes were dead, staring at a spot somewhere in the gray distance.
"Tell me you’ve got good news.
"What happened?" The childlike look of hope on his face broke Thomas’s heart—he obviously thought they’d found something important.
"You’re the first to come back," he said as he walked up to them.
Newt was notified and he came running.
It didn’t take long for some of the boys to notice them standing there.
Surprisingly, despite the dead light and everything falling apart, the day in the Glade appeared to be proceeding business as usual—farming, gardening, cleaning.
They’d been in the Maze for roughly twenty-four hours.
Thomas was so tired he wanted to lie down right there and take a nap.
By Thomas’s watch, it was midmorning when he and Minho stepped through the West Door back into the Glade.
They didn’t see another Griever the whole way.
He and Minho made their way silently back to the Glade.
The code seemed like their only hope now, and he resolved to focus on that.
Thomas hated to admit defeat, but he nodded in agreement.
"Let’s just go home," Minho said, his voice weary.
Any hope he’d felt earlier when they’d set out had crashed a long time ago.
"Thomas didn’t respond—felt the truth of what Minho said.
I think Gally was right—they’re gonna just keep killing us.
How much you wanna bet when we get back we find out a Griever took one of them just like last night?
And they want us to go back and tell the other Gladers.
The walls aren’t even moving anymore—it’s like this has all just been some stupid game and it’s time to end.
"I think the Creators want us to know there’s no way out.
The Keeper sighed.
"What do you mean?" Thomas asked.
From the looks of it, Minho felt the same way.
Thomas realized he’d given up on searching the walls and was just heading back toward the Glade in a depressed walk.
"I think they’re playing with us," Minho said a while later.
He and Minho continued on.
Thomas almost collapsed from the sudden rush of terror.
An hour after that, a Griever came charging through the Maze right past them, not even pausing.
Thirty minutes later, Thomas saw one do the exact same thing.
Minho spotted a Griever disappearing around a corner ahead of them; and it didn’t come back.
cost midnight.
But nothing showed up untiDoclalm.
He and Minho always had knives clasped firmly in both hands.
When wall- closing time rolled around, he started looking for signs of Grievers, was struck by an icy hesitation at every corner.
They found nothing, and Thomas was beginning to get ready to accept the inevitable—that there was nothing to find.
They had another meal, searched some more.
Minho didn’t even give it a second glance.
The only thing interesting was another one of those odd signs that read World In Catastrophe—Killzone Experiment Department.
They found nothing, and Thomas grew more and more discouraged.
For the next few hours, he and Minho scoured the ground, felt along the walls, climbed up the ivy in random spots.
To look for who-knew-what.
Without another word —from himself or Minho—he finished his food and readied himself to explore.
"Thomas already knew this, but hearing it made his heart sink even lower.
Surprise, surprise—no exits.
"We’ve already run through the whole section.
"This is it," Minho said after his second bite.
Thomas joined him on the ground and they attacked their modest lunch of sandwiches and sliced fruit.
The ivy was especially thick there; it made the world seem green and lush, hiding the hard, impenetrable stone.
He stopped and took a seat against the dead end.
Two breaks later, Minho finally slowed to a walk as they headed down a long corridor that ended in a wall.
He would just keep his mouth shut and run.
Thomas put his head down and drew in a long, deep breath.
Everything was weird enough already.
Throwing telepathy into the whole situation didn’t seem like the grandest of ideas.
But he didn’t dare.
In some ways, he wanted to tell Minho about how he and Teresa could talk, to share what was happening before it made his brain explode.
His stomach hurt, and the thought of running the rest of the day suddenly depressed him.
Thomas felt as if that bubble of air in his chest had burst, releasing toxins into his body.
Teresa?She was gone.
No reply.
Several seconds passed.
Teresa—what about the thing you wrote on your arm?
I’ll let you know if we figure anything out.
Bye, Tom.
Making the running easier somehow.
He didn’t want her to leave; she was helping the time pass.
No, wait!
See you later.
Okay, she said.
My head hurts, too.
Thomas was relieved to hear he wasn’t the only one.
Yeah, but this always gives me a headache.
he asked.
You still there?
He waited for a response, but none came.
His eyes popped back open when he realized she could maybe read his thoughts even when he wasn’t trying to communicate.
A pocket of air seemed to float in his chest every time they spoke, a swelling that half annoyed and half thrilled him.
Thomas squeezed his eyes shut for a few seconds as he ran, trying to concentrate.
You never know.
Maybe we’ll find an exit.
Maybe it won’t matter, he answered.
And the thing I wrote on my arm—WICKED is good.
This code has to mean something, she added.
He thought about what Teresa had said to him, too, the very first time—that he and she had somehow done all of this to them.
Thomas thought about what Gally, Ben and Alby had said about him—their suspicions that he was against them somehow, was someone not to trust.
I’m just trying to bounce ideas off you to see if it sparks anything in your mind.
What are you talking about?Wish I knew.
He wanted to dig a little more and see what she said.
Thomas thought about how he’d always felt a connection to her, ever since she arrived in the Glade.
I think we did something big.
How?I don’t know—some memory I can’t quite grasp.
Brains altered?
Hoped it, anyway —he was really starting to like her.
It was something he’d wondered about, and he thought she was probably right.
Which makes me think we already knew each other.
Before we came here.
I think someone altered our brains, put something in there so we could do this telepathy thing.
I just met you, remember?Don’t be stupid, Tom.
Sorry to break it to you, but we are strangers.
Thomas felt a pleasant chill even though he was sweating.
It’s like you’re a stranger, but I know you’re not.
This is so bizarre, she said.
He sensed a laugh from her, a watery image full of color.
he finally asked.
Smiling sheepishly at Minho, who’d turned to look without slowing, Thomas got back up and caught up to him.
Thomas tripped and crashed to the ground.
Maybe we were lovers, Teresa said.
The mental effort of speaking to her was already straining—he felt a headache forming like a bulge in his brain.
It had worked!Wonder why we can do this , he called out with his mind.
So shocked he almost quit running.
Thomas was shocked.
Really clearly the second time you said it.
Can you hear me?Yes!
Concentrating, he said it again.
he asked, picturing the words in his mind, mentally throwing them out to her in some way he could never have explained.
But he wanted to talk to her.
Thomas’s first instinct was to ignore her, to deny once again that someone had the ability to enter his mind, invade his privacy.
But none of it makes sense yet.
We’re making progress—found a couple more words already.
In the third hour, Teresa surprised him, speaking in his mind from back in the Glade.
Deeper and deeper into the Maze they went, with only their thoughts and the sounds of their feet thumping against the hard stone floor.
In, out.
Even.
Regular.
Minho had taught Thomas that speaking only wasted energy, so he concentrated on his pace and his breaths.
They were silent as they ran.
Minho allowed a twenty-minute break and then they were back at it.
There was no need for Mapmaking or taking notes; their only task was to get to the end and start making their way back, searching for things previously unnoticed—anything.
Everything was exactly the same.
They made good time—Thomas was glad for his wristwatch, with the skies being gray—because it quickly became obvious that the walls hadn’t moved from the day before.
44	Thomas and Minho didn’t stop until they were halfway to the last dead end of Section Eight.
Thomas flipped up double thumbs; then he and Minho pulled on their backpacks and entered the Maze.
"I’ll get you home!"Chuck turned and gave him a thumbs-up; his eyes glimmered with tears.
"Don’t forget my promise!" he yelled.
A sudden urge gripped him.
Thomas felt a pang of sadness—it was possible he might never see Chuck or Teresa or any of them again.
""Yeah, see ya," Chuck muttered, then turned to walk away.
"See ya, shank.
"  "Thanks, that means a lot," Minho answered with his own eye roll.
"Seriously, good luck.
" He was obviously trying hard to pretend he wasn’t scared of all the recent developments, but his eyes revealed the truth.
"You’re already using Alby’s dirty words.
""Wow," Chuck said.
"She’s not my girlfriend, shuck-face.
"Thomas rolled his eyes.
If your girlfriend gets lonely for you, I’ll give her some lovin’.
"Good luck.
""Well," Chuck said, looking down at his feet before returning his gaze to Thomas.
"Let’s go.
"Yeah," Minho responded evenly.
Though the thought didn’t make him feel much better.
After all, going out in the Maze was no worse than staying in the Glade with open Doors.
Butterflies swarmed in his gut, and he just wanted to move, to quit thinking about it.
""We better get going," Thomas said.
It’s all or nothing now, baby.
"Being careful hasn’t gotten us squat.
"Minho grunted.
We’ll definitely be careful.
"Thanks, Chuck.
"Thomas was touched—he bet that if it really came down to it, Chuck would go out there if he were asked to.
"I wish I could help you guys.
""Be careful," Chuck said, his tone quickly melting into genuine concern.
"Thanks for the words of encouragement.
" Thomas laughed, surprising himself.
"I’d go with you," the boy said in a far too jovial voice, "but I don’t wanna die a gruesome death.
He and Minho were stretching their legs by the West Door when Chuck walked over to say goodbye.
Despite his fear, Thomas couldn’t help being excited as well—maybe this was the day they’d find an exit.
He and Minho packed their backpacks with more supplies than usual; there was no telling how long they’d be out there.
Thomas was to go with him—which made Thomas so relieved he was almost ashamed of himself.
They had eight experienced Runners to do that.
Even though he was nervous and scared, he told Minho he could take one of the sections himself, but the Keeper refused.
He was surprised at how readily everyone agreed that it was time to do some more in-depth exploring of the Maze and stay out there overnight.
Thomas helped Minho gather the Runners to give them the news and organize them for the big journey.
Without even saying goodbye, he finally followed Minho and they went up the stairs.
But he pushed it all aside.
An itch to learn the code, embarrassment at what Newt thought of him and Teresa, the intrigue of what they might find out in the Maze—and fear.
" Thomas felt a million thoughts go through his head in that moment.
"Your girlfriend will be fine.
"Don’t worry, Tommy," Newt said.
" He started toward the door, but stopped when he realized Thomas wasn’t behind him.
Come on.
"Everything’s fine and dandy.
" Minho nodded and turned to go.
" He folded his own arms, staring at her with a smile, suddenly not wanting to leave again.
"If you say so.
" Her grin turned into a smirk.
"If you’re going to decipher a hidden code from a complex set of different mazes, I’m pretty sure you need a girl’s brain running the show.
She smiled and folded her arms.
co Minho and Newt were right.
"You sure?" He was itching to figure out the code himself, but heiDocdeded.
" Thomas looked at her.
"I’ll stay and help Newt.
"Me too," Teresa agreed.
" Newt sounded more like a leader than ever before.
I’ll round up some Gladers we can trust and get workin’ on this.
You shanks go out and get Runnin’.
"Minho’s right.
What about—""Tommy," Newt said in a consoling voice.
Conflicted, he asked, "But what about this code?
"That piqued Thomas’s interest—he had been wanting to do that.
In fact, with the freaking walls not closing anymore, I think we should try your idea—stay out there overnight and do some deeper exploring.
Something might’ve changed, something might’ve opened up.
Of all days, this might be the most important to get out there.
"That’s bullcrap, Thomas!
"Minho slammed his hand against the table.
You said the pattern’s basically been repeating itself for months—one more day won’t mean a thing.
"Why, Minho?
Running the Maze seemed like such a waste of time compared to figuring out the code.
"Thomas felt a rush of disappointment.
Not now.
"This is way more important!""Maybe," Minho answered calmly, "but we can’t miss a day out there.
""What?" Thomas asked.
We need to get the Runners out in the Maze.
"At least not me and Thomas here.
He returned their glares.
All three of them looked at him.
""We can’t help," Minho said.
"Let’s get on it.
""Yeah," Thomas nodded.
"We need to go through all of them—all those boxes in there.
Teresa gestured toward the storage closet.
He couldn’t wait to see more.
"Definitely not," Thomas agreed.
"Definitely not a coincidence," Minho said.
FLOAT and CATCH.
Another couple of combinations made them realize that the second word was actually CATCH.
" "We just need to keep working," Thomas said.
"Doesn’t sound like a bloody rescue code to me.
""Float cat?" Newt asked.
"It spells FLOAT and then it spells CAT.
After the F was an L, then an O, then an A, and a T.
Then C … A … T.
"Look," Thomas said, pointing down the line of stacks they’d formed, confused, but happy that the letters were so obvious.
Each time, an obvious letter formed in the center of the crisscrossed mass of lines.
"Thomas did, putting together the eight pages of each day, in order from Section One to Section Eight.
"Do more, quick.
"Could be a coincidence," Teresa said.
"Man," Minho said, summing up Thomas’s feelings with one word.
Sitting in the exact center of the page was the letter F.
43	Thomas felt a rush of different emotions: relief that it had worked, surprise, excitement, wonder at what it could lead to.
It was subtle, but it was, without a doubt, there.
But certain lines in the middle—lines that happened to appear more often than any other—made a slightly darker image than the rest.
Lines crossed each other, up and down, so much so that what Thomas held in his hands looked like a checkered grid.
Teresa let out a small gasp.
Almost magically, like a picture coming into focus, an image developed.
What he saw amazed him.
He then laid them one on top of the other so that each drawing of the Maze matched the same day above it and below it, until he was looking at eight different sections of the Maze at once.
Jittery and nervous, Thomas picked up one page from each pile, making sure they were all from the same day, keeping them in order.
Silently, they did as he asked, sorting through what they’d traced until eight low stacks of wax paper lined the table.
" He pointed at the other end.
One here"—he pointed at an end—"to Eight here.
"Okay, give me the last few days of each section—make piles along the table, in order from Section One to Section Eight.
"Thomas put his marker down, then flexed his fingers, hoping he’d been right about all this.
See if it’s working.
"My fingers are bloody burning like a mother.
"I’ve had enough," Newt finally announced, breaking the quiet.
Box by box, section by section, they continued on.
She seemed way more confident that they were definitely on to something.
But Teresa, sitting next to him, was a study in concentration, her tongue sticking out the corner of her mouth as she traced lines up and down, side to side.
As Thomas drew, he started to feel a tickle of panic, a sick feeling that what they were doing was a complete waste of time.
The others kept the same pace, working feverishly.
Soon he’d completed five maps, then five more.
Thomas used the side of a stray slab of wood as a makeshift ruler, keeping his lines straight.
They got to work, tracing from original Maps to wax paper, one by one, trying to keep it clean and correct while hurrying as fast as possible.
" Thomas was relieved someone was finally getting it.
"I think I know where he’s going with this.
"Just bloody keep cutting," Newt ordered.
""What—" Minho began.
co we might see something.
When we’re done,iDocIthink.
Make sure you write the info on top so we can keep track of what’s what.
"All right, everybody trace the last ten or so days onto a piece of this stuff.
He grabbed a marker.
It was exactly what he needed.
He held one of the papers up to the light, saw how it shone through with a milky glow.
Thomas sat down and grabbed a few.
Returning to the table, Thomas found that Minho had cut twenty sheets already, making a messy pile to his right as he threw each new piece on top.
The two of them went into the dusty little room and opened up all the boxes, grabbing a small stack of Maps from each one.
"Can you help me a second?" He nodded toward the closet.
"Teresa," he said aloud.
But she didn’t respond.
Just … come … help … me, he tried to say back, thinking each word separately, trying to visualize the message, send it.
He knew he had to pretend he didn’t have voices in his head—the others would think he was a lunatic.
Thomas was startled, but he tried his best to cover it up.
Brilliant, actually.
I think I know what you’re doing.
Teresa had stayed quiet for a while, but she spoke up inside Thomas’s head.
"Minho sighed, clearly irritated, then muttered something under his breath.
If I’m wrong, I’m wrong, and we can go back to running around the Maze like mice.
"It’ll be easier to show you.
He stood to go rummage through the storage closet.
"Why don’t you just tell us what the klunk we’re doing this for?""I’m done explaining," Thomas said, knowing they just had to see what he was picturing in his mind.
""What is this, kiddie craft time?" Minho held up the knife and looked at it with disgust.
Newt and Teresa, you can help me grab the first ten or so Maps from each section box.
"Start cutting rectangles, about the size of the Maps.
He handed the knife to Minho, then pointed at the wax paper.
" Thomas was eager to do so, but was also scared to death it might end up being nothing.
""Okay.
"Get on with it, Greenie.
Newt leaned forward, putting his elbows on the table, as if waiting for a magic trick.
Warning laced his voice, but his eyes showed some interest.
"This better be good," Minho said.
They hadn’t found any scissors, so Thomas had grabbed the sharpest knife he could find.
After ten minutes of hunting down pencils and markers—most had been in the Map Room and were destroyed in the fire—Thomas sat around the worktable in the weapons basement with Newt, Minho and Teresa.
They finally had to tell him what they needed it for to convince him to give it up.
He argued that it was one of the things he always requested, that he used it for baking.
"Frypan wasn’t too happy having a whole box of his wax paper rolls taken away from him, especially with their supplies being cut off.
And every black marker and pencil you can find.
We need wax paper and scissors.
"What the—""Just trust me.
""Huh?" Minho asked.
"Wax paper.
He looked up at the others.
In that instant, heknew what they had to do.
He could just barely see the lines of the Maze written on the second page through the page resting on top.
"                          Thomas pulled his legs up underneath him, studying the Maps in his lap.
We’ve tried everything.
We tried to see if they made something when put together—of course we did that.
"Yeah, kind of.
Did you ever compare sections to other sections?"Minho rubbed his chin, nodding.
Each day being a separate clue or code?
What if, instead, you were supposed to compare the eight sections to each other, every day?
"And that Runner makes a Map every day, and then compares it to Maps from previous days, for that section.
He seemed genuinely interested and ready to understand.
"You’ve always had one Runner assigned to one section, right?""Right," Minho replied.
"Okay, okay," he said, starting over.
It was just so hard to put into words.
The answer was within his grasp—he knew he was almost there.
"While he’d been talking, Thomas’s mind had been spinning even faster.
"Tommy, I might not be the sharpest guy in the Glade, but sounds like you’re talkin’ straight out your butt to me.
And maybe you weren’t supposed to compare one day to the next, but look at it one day at a time?"Newt laughed.
Don’t you think we would’ve noticed if it were spelling out freaking words?""Maybe it’s too hard to see with the naked eye, just comparing one day to the next.
"Dude, you have any idea how much we’ve studied these things?
"Minho pointed at the Maps in Thomas’s hand, letting out a frustrated sigh.
Some kind of clue that’ll help us escape.
What if instead the pattern spelled words?
"Well," Thomas continued, "what if all the wall movements had nothing to do with a map or a maze or anything like that?
He looked as if someone were about to reveal the secret of immortal life.
Right?"Minho nodded, arms folded.
You even said you didn’t really know what you were looking for, but you kept studying them anyway.
"The Runners have always compared these day to day, looking to see if there was a pattern that would somehow help figure out a way to an exit.
"Okay," he said.
Thomas reached in and pulled out a stack.
The Maps for Section Two lay in a messy heap.
"Just open it and see—each page is marked, remember?"Thomas pulled on the crisscrossed lid flaps until they popped open.
""Which one is this?" Thomas asked; he knelt down next to it, eager to get started.
They’re all in there.
"I put each trunk’s worth in its own box, eight boxes total.
"Thomas heard the creak of an old wooden door, and then Minho was dragging a cardboard box across the floor; the scrape of it sounded like a knife on bone.
"Only a couple of us know about it.
"There’s a hidden storage closet back here," Minho explained, walking past some shelves into a dark corner.
The dank, musty smell only added to the creepy feel of the room.
Menacing shadows clung to the boxes of weapons scattered across the table and floor, blades and sticks and other nasty-looking devices seeming to wait there, ready to take on a life of their own and kill the first person stupid enough to come close.
"Minho switched on the light, making Thomas squint for a second until his eyes got used to it.
"Okay, let’s go.
""Take me to them," Thomas said, itching to have a look.
So if you have a theory, get talking.
"Every last one of those suckers.
"They’re all safe and sound," Minho said.
Thomas looked over at Newt, who nodded.
He remembered Minho acting suspicious the day before, saying he had a special assignment.
"Thomas was so excited to hear this news he temporarily forgot how awful things had become.
And because of the so-called Ending your girlfriend triggered.
Because of Alby’s warning.
"We hid the freaking Maps in the weapons room, put dummies in their place.
"Huh?"Minho pointed at the Homestead.
" At first it didn’t compute.
"We hid the Maps, Thomas.
"Minho rubbed his eyes with both hands, took a deep breath.
"You guys keep acting like you have a secret.
"What?" Thomas asked, fed up with them keeping information from him.
Newt nodded.
"Minho glanced at Newt, his eyebrows raised in question.
That’s why I was hoping you guys could remember some of them.
But I have a theory.
"I don’t know for sure—you’re way more familiar with the Maps than I am.
"How’s it a code?"Thomas shook his head, wishing he could answer.
""A code?" Minho asked.
That maybe instead of solving it to find a way out, it’s trying to send us a message.
She, um"—he just barely stopped himself from saying she’d said it inside his mind—"she told me later that she remembers that the Maze is a code.
"Okay, when Teresa was first coming out of her deep sleep, she had memories flashing through her mind.
""Yeah, you look so dangerous," Thomas muttered, but he turned his attention to Newt and Minho.
"You talk—they obviously think I’m a serial killer.
"What?" she said.
"What’s so important?" Thomas looked at Teresa, wondering how to say it.
"All right, talk," Minho said.
Her arm brushed against his; tingles shot across his skin, and he felt mortally embarrassed.
She gave a just-as-unpleasant glance toward Minho, then stopped to stand right next to Thomas.
"Teresa walked out of the small building, glowering at Newt as she passed him.
"Come on.
A few clinks later the door swung wide open.
"Newt grunted and stepped up to the Slammer, pulling his keys out as he did so.
"I’m sure we have a lot to do before the Grievers come back tonight— if they don’t come during the day.
""Just hurry," Thomas said.
"Real sweet girl you picked up, Tommy.
"And I can hear every word you morons are saying!"Newt’s eyes widened.
""I’m not stupid!" Teresa shouted, her voice muffled by the walls.
Just let the stupid girl out.
"Fine.
"  Minho sighed.
"What’s she gonna do, run around and stab every Glader to death?
"Come on," Thomas insisted.
"Newt and Minho exchanged a long look.
Just let her out.
Maybe we all went through that in the Box, talking gibberish before we came totally awake.
"Who knows—her mind was doing all kinds of weird stuff when she woke up.
There had to be an explanation.
"Then what the bloody shuck did she mean by sayin’ she triggered something?"Thomas shrugged, refusing to admit that Newt had a good point.
"Newt grunted.
She was sent here just like the rest of us—it’s stupid to think she’s responsible for any of this.
Every time I’ve talked to her, it’s something about trying to get out of here.
"We can trust her.
Thomas gestured through the door at Teresa.
""He’s got a point," Newt said.
She even admitted she triggered something.
"Soon as she woke up, the whole place fell to pieces.
"How can we trust her?" he asked.
Minho stood in front of the door with his hands on his hips.
" He wouldn’t give up this time.
Please.
Just open it—let her out.
"Tommy, this is—""Please.
He certainly didn’t seem to be in a very good mood.
"Newt was covered in soot and dirt, his hair matted with sweat.
Trust me—you wanna hear it.
"Let her out, and then we’ll talk.
" Thomas stood by the cell door, arms folded.
"Let her out.
Then he turned and headed for the Slammer without waiting for a response.
"Just come with me," Thomas said.
"Talk about what?"Minho nodded at Thomas, but didn’t say anything.
" When the kid ran off to do as he was told, Newt stepped away from Alby.
"Go find Clint—tell him we got worse problems than guys with buggin’ splinters.
"Newt gave him a questioning look, then handed the rag to the closest Glader.
We need to talk.
"Let the Med-jacks take care of him.
Minho pointed down at Alby.
Thomas couldn’t help noticing that every inch was drenched in red.
"Yeah?" Newt stood up, refolding his bloody rag to find a clean spot.
"Newt!" he called out.
" Minho thought for a second.
You and Newt.
What?""Just come over to the Slammer with me.
"An idea?
"This seemed to get Minho’s full attention—but again, there was that same strange look, as if Thomas was missing something very obvious.
Maybe it’ll still work if enough Runners remember their Maps.
"Just give us a few minutes—we have an idea.
"Thomas ignored the insult.
""That stupid girl is the last thing I’m worried about.
And we need to let Teresa out—she’s probably starving and we could use her help.
"Minho, I need to tell you and Newt something.
He decided he’d better share about the possible Maze code, Maps or no Maps.
If he expected the other boys to be honest, he should be honest too.
"Thomas took a deep breath and thought.
You’ll find out soon enough.
"Just shut your hole.
" Minho put his fingers to his lips, his eyes darting around to see ifanyone was looking at him.
"What did—"  "Just shut your hole for now.
" Thomas narrowed his eyes in curiosity.
"That’s not what I meant, shank.
There was a flash of anger there, but it quickly melted into an odd expression of surprise or confusion.
"Now who’s the one giving up?"Minho’s head snapped up so quickly, Thomas took a step backward.
"Thomas was surprised at the sudden change of heart.
Doesn’t matter.
I don’t know, and I don’t care.
Maybe the Grievers?
"Maybe Gally before he showed up in the Homestead and went psycho?
With no Maps, the point was moot.
""Who do you think did it?" Thomas was hesitant to tell him about the possible discovery he and Teresa had made.
It’s nasty.
I suspected Alby at first, but whoever did it slammed his shuck head against the table—you can see where.
All the trunks are burned to a freaking crisp.
Some shanks got in there and put it out, but way too late.
"Winston found him out here, half dead, the Map Room blazing.
Thomas, concerned for Alby despite his recent ill-tempered ways, turned back to Minho and repeated his question.
Newt was cleaning it with a wet rag, gingerly, asking questions in a whisper too low to hear.
Blood seeped down both sides of his head, some into his eyes, crusting there.
It was Alby, flat on his back, a huge gash on his forehead.
" Thomas leaned over the shoulder of a skinny boy standing in front of him to get a look at the body on the ground.
What the—""I’m sorry—just tell me what happened.
"Yeah, this’d be a great freaking time to give up.
"I didn’t think it mattered anymore—if you haven’t figured out the Maps by now …"Minho looked disgusted, the pale light and fog of smoke making his face seem almost sinister.
What’s wrong with you?"Thomas knew the rebuke should’ve stung, but his mind was too preoccupied.
"Our Map Room was set on fire and you ran off to talk to your shuck girlfriend?
Minho’s forehead creased in anger.
"To talk to Teresa—what happened?" He waited anxiously for the next dump of bad news.
"Where’d you go?" he asked.
Minho was standing behind him, looking distraught and dirty, and spotted Thomas first.
He spotted Newt, kneeling there in the middle, leaning over a body.
But as he got closer, he realized they were surrounding something on the ground, all of them looking down at it.
The first thing Thomas saw when he ran up was a group of Gladers huddled just outside the large steel door, still ajar, its outer edge blackened with soot.
If Teresa was right, and they’d been that close to figuring out some kind of clue to get out of there, only to see it literally lost in flames … It was so upsetting it hurt.
Needles of pain pricked his insides.
" He turned before she could protest and set off at a sprint for the Map Room and its foggy black cloud of smoke.
"I can’t—I’ll be back, I promise.
"Get me out of here!"But there was no time, and Thomas felt awful about it.
""Wait!" Teresa yelled.
"I gotta find Newt, see if any of the Maps survived.
His stomach was full of acid.
""I’ll be back," Thomas said, turning to go.
If there was a code, it’s gone.
"Someone burned all the Maps.
" "What!" she demanded.
"I didn’t think it mattered….
Thomas faced her again.
She couldn’t see the Map Room from her angle.
"What’s wrong?" Teresa repeated.
The smoke had lessened, but it still wafted out the door, a dark, hazy cloud covering the entire area.
He turned to look at the Map Room.
"What’s wrong?""Oh no oh no oh no …" Thomas let go of the bars and stumbled back a step as the realization hit him.
"Teresa’s eyes flared with worry.
We’ve gotta—" Then he stopped, remembering what he’d just been told by Newt.
They’ve been studying it like a map, not like a picture of something.
But they’ve always thought the movements would reveal how to escape, not spell something.
"Or maybe a letter a day, I don’t know.
"With the wall movements?"Thomas nodded.
What if each day is a separate piece of the code, and they’re supposed to use all eight sections together somehow?""You think maybe each day is trying to reveal a word?" Teresa asked.
But they’ve always studied them section by section, comparing one day to the next.
"Minho said the patterns repeat themselves, only they can’t figure out what it means.
What’re you talking about?"Thomas grabbed the two bars outside of where she held on, moved close enough to smell her—a surprisingly pleasant scent of sweat and flowers.
"What?
They’ve been analyzing it the wrong way!"Teresa gripped the bars now, her knuckles white, her face pressed against the iron rods.
But the Runners have been looking at it wrong this whole time.
"You’re right—you’re right!
"Everything came together so quickly in Thomas’s mind, he almost heard an audible click, as if the pieces all snapped into place at once.
Maybe the Maze is trying to spell something.
Letters in the alphabet.
"The first thing the word code makes me think of is letters.
Teresa seemed to ignore him, doing her own theorizing.
What if they’re supposed to compare the Maps to other sections …" He trailed off, feeling like he was on the cusp of something.
"They always compare each section’s Map to the one from the day before, and the day before that, and the day before that, day by day, each Runner just analyzing their own Section.
"Thomas almost didn’t hear her—he was thinking harder than he had in a while.
So there must be an important reason.
And I felt like I needed to say that thing about the code before I lost it.
cof the coma all sorts of thoughts and memories swirled through my head like crazy, almost as if I could feel someone emptying my mind, sucking them out.
I know when I was comiDocngut.
"Well, I can’t remember why I said that to you about the code.
" Gears were starting to shift into place inside Thomas’s head as well, almost as if a prior memory was beginning to break loose.
"And Minho said they think there’s a pattern, right?""Right.
" He could tell she was really on to something.
"Well, the walls move every day, right?""Yeah.
""What do you think it means?" Intensely interested, he tried to block out the shouts and chatter rumbling through the Glade as others found out about the Map Room being burned.
Being holed up in here does wonders for making the brain do what it was made for.
That the Maze is a code.
"Tom, I was thinking about what you told me I said.
He stopped himself, though.
" Thomas had the same strange urge he’d had the night before—to reach out and take one of her hands.
Something like that.
Or variables.
He also said it had to do with … trials.
Why?""I don’t know.
"Just one a night?
"Teresa put her hands through the bars, rested her forearms against the concrete sill.
He said something about them killing us one a night until we were all dead—he said it at least twice.
Why would the Grievers have left after getting Gally?
"I just don’t get it.
He turned back to Teresa.
Gladers were scattered all over the complex, but there was no sign of their leader.
Surely he’d let Teresa out now.
" He looked behind him, hoping to see Alby somewhere.
"Which is saying a lot," Teresa said.
" He still couldn’t believe it had actually happened.
It was really weird.
He showed up, jumped on a Griever, and they all took off into the Maze.
"You don’t know Gally, but he’s a psycho kid who ran away.
"Thomas sighed; it was such a long story, and he didn’t feel like telling the whole thing.
""Just tell me what happened.
"Cut that junk out.
Thomas blinked, momentarily surprised by the voice since she hadn’t done it in a while.
" Now answer my question, she said inside his head.
See how you do.
""You try coming out of a coma sometime.
"I don’t know how you could’ve slept through the sound of all those Grievers out here.
What happened?"Thomas shook his head in disbelief.
"Until I heard something shred the Homestead to bits.
"I was," she responded.
He was relieved to see that she appeared okay, felt himself relax.
"Were you sleeping?" Thomas asked.
"Was anybody killed?" she asked, somewhat groggy.
Her face appeared, hands rubbing her eyes.
"Teresa?" he asked.
But Thomas could think of only one thing.
Thomas had noticed them exchange an odd look before they split up, almost as if communicating some secret with their eyes.
He stood outside the window of the Slammer, having left Newt and Minho when they went to investigate the sabotage of the Map Room.
"	For some reason, Thomas didn’t care about the Maps that much—they seemed pointless anyway.
"Every last one of ’em.
"Somebody burned the Map trunks," Newt said.
The heavy metal door of the Map Room was slightly ajar, a wispy trail of black smoke drifting out and into the gray sky.
"Thomas looked in that direction.
"You can still see the buggin’ smoke.
" Newt pointed his thumb over his shoulder.
"You said we had worse—""Yeah.
"What were you about to tell me?" he asked.
"Thomas’s thoughts tried to drift toward the Hole and what it all meant, but he couldn’t shake the thought of what Newt had been about to say before they saw Minho return.
"What a night.
"I just can’t believe it," Newt said, almost whispering.
" Minho wiped sweat from his forehead.
"Bingo.
""And?" Thomas said.
Toward the Griever Hole.
I just wanted to see if they went toward the Cliff.
"Slim it, boys!
"Minho straightened and put his hands on his hips, still breathing heavily.
"Lotta good you’d be, taken with Gally.
""Make sure of what?" Newt asked.
"I just … wanted to … make sure.
"What were you doing, idiot!"Minho waited until he made it back through the Door, then bent over, hands on his knees, and sucked in a few breaths before answering.
Thomas cupped his hands.
Minho had just turned a corner up ahead and was coming straight for them.
"There he is!" Thomas shouted.
"Somebody—" Newt began.
" "What?" Thomas knew if he wanted to catch up with Minho he had no time for this.
But right now we’ve got worse problems.
""Yeah, well, you’re a regular toughie.
All I care about is getting out of here.
"You think I do things to impress you shanks?
" "Time to be a bloody hero again?"Thomas looked at Newt sharply, hurt by the rebuke.
"I’m going after him.
"Thomas could only worry about Minho.
Always knew he was crazy.
Minho must’ve finally fried his last bit of brain cells—not to mention Gally.
"Shuck it, that hurts like a mother.
"I saw," Newt said, pulling the towel away to look at it; he grimaced and put it back.
A patchy spot of blood had already seeped through the white material.
"Minho followed it out there!" Thomas yelled when Newt caught up to him, a small towel pressed against the wound on his head.
Newt called to him from behind, delaying the decision.
He pulled up just short of the threshold of the Maze, his instincts forcing him to think twice about entering.
He pushed his way through a crowd in the foyer, tore out of the Homestead and toward the West Door, sprinting.
He ran into the hallway, then leaped down the stairs three at a time.
Thomas ignored all of it.
Chaos ruled.
A couple of boys cried in a corner.
Gladers ran about, everyone talking at once.
Lights blazed throughout the Homestead.
Minho, running full speed, disappeared into the Maze.
He screamed—yelled at him to stop—but it was too late.
Despite the poor light, Thomas realized who it was immediately.
A lone shape was sprinting across the courtyard of the Glade toward the exit through which Gally had just been taken.
He quickly leaned out of the building to get a better look.
He began to back away from the window, but something outside caught his eye.
Thomas was sickened to the verge of throwing up.
Then, seconds later, several other monsters followed close behind their companion, whirring and clicking as if celebrating their victory.
The lights of the monster shone brightly, casting an eerie yellow glow across the stone of the open West Door, where the Griever exited into the depths of the Maze.
Thomas ran to the jagged, gaping hole, looked down just in time to see the Griever land and start scooting across the Glade, Gally’s body appearing and disappearing as the thing rolled.
Then, with surprising speed, the Griever pushed itself back outside the shattered frame of the window and began descending toward the ground below.
The boy’s body sank several inches into the creature’s squishy flesh, making a horrific squelching sound.
Thomas yelled out as he watched every extended arm of the monster immediately retract and clasp onto Gally’s arms and legs, making escape or rescue impossible.
You don’t … want … to remember!"Gally gave Thomas a long, haunted look, his eyes full of terror; then he turned and dove onto the writhing body of the Griever.
Don’t go back to the real world, Thomas!
"No one ever understood what I saw, what the Changing did to me!
"No one ever understood!" the boy screamed over the horrible noise of the creature, crunching its way deeper into the Homestead, ripping the wall to pieces.
But its body kept churning, trying to squeeze its way inside.
Then Gally was speaking again; the Griever pulled back its arm, as if it needed the thing to be able to observe and listen.
Panic exploded within him, consumed him.
All he saw were knives—they couldn’t help him now.
He scrambled to his feet, searched the floor around him for a weapon.
That was all it took to break him from his fear.
Frozen, Thomas watched as one of the Griever’s long arms reached for the lifeless body.
Thomas was so terrified, he barely registered that everyone else in the room had fled to the hallway—all except Newt, who lay unconscious on the bed.
A Griever’s pulsating, bulbous body had squirmed halfway through the destroyed window, metallic arms with pincers snapping and clawing in all directions.
When he bumped into the bed, he gathered himself and looked up, ready to face his world coming to an end.
Thomas covered his face and fell to the floor, kicking his legs out to scoot his body as far away as possible.
The instant the discarded slab hit the floor of the room, the glass of the window exploded inward like a swarm of crystal wasps.
He watched the boy reach back and rip loose the final wooden board.
He was completely baffled by what Gally was saying.
"Thomas felt as if his feet were rooted to the ground.
I can only do what’s right.
I know who you are, but I don’t care anymore.
Y.
cou shut up!
"You shut your shuck-face, ThiDocmas.
"What’re you doing!" The boy spat on the ground, panting like a winded dog.
"Gally!" Thomas yelled.
Thomas pulled up short, readying himself for a fight.
He swung it backward with both hands and connected with Newt’s head, sent him sprawling across the bed as a small spray of blood sprinkled the sheets.
Gally ripped off the second board just as Newt reached him.
Thomas followed to help, in utter disbelief at what was happening.
"No!" Newt yelled, running forward.
Before Thomas or anyone else could react, he’d already ripped one board free; he threw it to the ground.
They’re gonna kill you, all of you— one by one!"Screaming the last word, Gally threw his body toward the window and started tearing at the wooden boards like a wild animal trying to escape a cage.
There’s no way out—there’s no way to win!
You’re too stupid—you’ve always been too stupid.
"You don’t get it, Newt.
"Gally looked up, his eyes narrowing.
Just sit on your butt and be quiet—maybe it’ll go away.
"Gally, shut your bloody hole—there’s a Griever right out the window.
Newt took a step forward.
"They’ll only kill you one a night … their stupid Variables …"Thomas listened in awe, trying to suppress his fear so he could memorize everything the crazed boy said.
" His eyes fell to the floor.
I … It’s better thisway….
The Grievers’ll kill you … one every night till it’s over….
"The shuck Maze’ll kill all you shanks….
"It can’t be solved," he said, his voice now quiet and distant, spooky.
Thomas assumed Gally would retaliate, but he straightened instead, taking everyone in with his mad gaze.
The lamp scooted off the side and broke into pieces on the ground.
Gally stumbled backward and crashed into the desk by the window.
Newt had finally snapped out of his daze and pushed Gally away.
He scrambled to his feet as soon as he’d hit the floor.
Crying out, Thomas crumpled to the ground, more taken by surprise than pain.
"It’s all your fault!" Without warning he swung his left hand, forming it into a fist as it came around and crashed into Thomas’s ear.
"You," he said with a sneer so pronounced it went past comical to flat-out disturbing.
Gally stopped, standing just a few feet in front of Thomas and Newt; he pointed at Thomas with a bloody finger.
Thomas was almost more afraid of their surprise visitor than he was of the Grievers just outside the window.
Even Newt stood mouth agape.
No one in the room moved a muscle as they watched, obviously too stunned to do anything.
"The Grievers will kill you all— one every night till it’s over!"Thomas watched, speechless, as Gally staggered to his feet and walked forward, dragging his right leg with a heavy limp.
"They’ll kill you!" Gally screamed, spittle flying everywhere.
It was as if they all believed as Thomas did— that Gally was only a figment of their imagination.
He looked about the room like a rabid dog searching for someone to bite.
He dropped to his knees and stayed there, his chest heaving with deep, sucking breaths.
Gally’s eyes raged with lunacy; his clothes were torn and filthy.
But when he saw who stood there, his skull seemed to contract, squeezing his brain in shock.
Thomas turned to see who’d opened the door, expecting a frightened Chuck or maybe a reconsidering Alby.
The Gladers had been expecting something from the window, not from behind them.
Gasps and shouts exploded throughout the room.
He was just wishing she’d say something to him when the door from the hallway suddenly whipped open.
Then he remembered Teresa in the Slammer.
He thought much the same must be going on in the other rooms of the Homestead.
The tension in the air was thick; Thomas couldn’t hear anyone breathing.
A few seconds later the shadow stopped; the light settled to a standstill, casting three unmoving planes of brightness into the room.
He imagined beetle blades out there, helping the creatures find their way.
Thomas knew that the Griever’s probes and weapons had come out, searching for a feast.
Then a thin shadow interrupted the light, moving back and forth.
Lights flickered out there, casting odd beams through the cracks between the wooden boards.
Thomas could almost hear his own heart beating.
Just when it grew unbearable—just as Thomas realized the Griever was right outside the window —everything fell silent.
Thomas finally followed suit, Newt right beside him; everyone huddled against the far wall, staring at the window.
They grew louder, closer—the other boys had shuffled across the room and as far away from the window as possible.
The crunching and groaning and snapping of the wood became the only sounds in the world to Thomas, horrifying.
The whole building shuddered.
Thomas heard the Grievers’ spikes shred the wood siding in their path as they tore out and rotated around to take hold once again.
Thomas could picture it all: the creature’s metal spikes digging into the wooden sides of the Homestead, the massive creature rolling its body, climbing up toward their room, defying gravity with its strength.
Then the clicking of its spikes against the stone suddenly turned into a deeper, hollower sound.
One of the Grievers sounded like it was moving toward the house.
Fear seemed to hover in the air like a blizzard of black snow.
The others in the room were still; no one made a sound.
Thomas’s mouth dried up—he’d seen them face to face, remembered it all too well; he had to remind himself to breathe.
All hums and metallic clatter.
He heard the twisted animal-machines come closer, so close, waiting on the stone blocks below.
At least.
Sounded like three or four of them were just outside.
Thomas winced in fear every time he heard something.
Things snapping and opening and snapping.
The clicking of spikes against the hard stone.
The squeal of small engines followed by a grinding spin of metal.
A few minutes passed, various Griever sounds penetrating the walls every ten to twenty seconds.
Newt walked over and sat back down on the bed.
After a minute or so, he gave up and turned to sit with his back against the wall.
But all he saw was the open Glade; he didn’t have enough space to look up or down or to the side, just straight ahead.
He crouched below Newt against the lowest of the wooden boards, pressing his eye against a crack—it was terrifying being so close to the wall.
co Newt leaned in to take a look, and Thomas crept over to join him.
iDocCarefully,.
Large cracks allowed for plenty of space to peek outside.
Favoring his bad leg, he tiptoed toward the lone window in the room, which was covered by three hastily nailed boards.
But Newt was up before anyone, waving his arms, then shushing the room by putting a finger to his lips.
Thomas shot to his feet, as did most of the others.
A mechanized surge of machinery sounded from outside, followed by the familiar rolling clicks of a Griever on the stony ground, as if someone had scattered a handful of nails.
Then everything changed.
He put his hands under his chin and stared at the foot of the bed, almost a shadow in the dim light.
Thomas guessed it was about two in the morning when he turned from his back to his stomach for the millionth time that night.
Sleep finally came, but in miserable fits.
Then another.
Another hour passed.
The distant wails of the Grievers grew closer as the night stretched on, every minute seeming to last longer than the one before it.
The waiting was unbearable.
He almost wished the suckers would just come and get it over with.
The anticipation of what might happen was overpowering, a suffocating blanket of misery and fear that began to take on a life of its own.
Anything that could be done on such short notice to prepare for a Griever attack had been done: windows boarded up, furniture moved in front of doors, knives handed out as weapons …But none of that made Thomas feel safe.
Otherwise, Newt had ordered all lights extinguished despite the pale, deathly glow of their new sky—no sense attracting any more attention than necessary.
Almost every person had a flashlight by their side in case of emergency.
The image saddened Thomas so deeply he tried to replace it, but to no avail.
Chuck had ended up in another room, and for some reason Thomas pictured him huddled in a dark corner, crying, squeezing his blankets to his chest like a teddy bear.
The bed had gone to Newt.
He lay on the floor in one of the upper rooms, on top of a thick blanket, several other Gladers crammed in there with him, almost body to body.
Thomas tried hard to force himself to sleep, knowing it would make the time pass faster, but after two hours he’d still had no luck.
All you could hear were quiet shuffles and whispers.
No one said much, the mood somber and grim.
The other Gladers settled themselves, turning in with their pillows and blankets for the impossible task of sleeping.
Time slowed to an agonizing crawl; he felt as if the next day might never come.
It made Thomas feel off-kilter, as if the urge to sleep that grew steadily with every passing minute were somehow unnatural.
It was strange to know that the night grew later, that darkness should’ve swallowed the world around them, but to see only the pale gray light outside.
"And then he walked out.
"See you shucks in the morning.
" Alby took his ring of keys from his pocket and rattled them mockingly—Thomas couldn’t believe the sudden bravery.
"You can’t go out there now!""I’m going, and that’s that.
"You can’t be serious," Newt said.
co meant to leave.
" He moved toward the door of the room as ifiDochereally.
"Seriously, I need this.
Alby stood up.
He’d grown sick of all the contention.
"Relief flooded Thomas.
I need something to dive into.
If I’m gonna do this, I gotta do it, be the old me.
Don’t start whining when I actually listen.
"Hey, you shucks are the ones giving me all the pep talks.
"Alby leaned forward, elbows on his knees.
We can wait till the wake-up.
Already heard the bloody Grievers moaning out there.
"Forget that, Alby.
"Newt shook his head.
""Well … I’ll go," Alby said with a confident nod.
"Probably right.
Minho shrugged.
"Thomas thought that was the smartest thing he’d heard Alby say in a long time.
We should’ve been out in the Map Room, working.
"Ya know, it was really stupid for us to sleep in here tonight.
Alby put his feet back on the floor, sat up straighter.
Thomas wanted to agree, but didn’t know if it was his place.
""Works for me," Minho said.
I’ll freaking work every Glader to the bone studying those things.
Put me in charge of the Maps.
"Hey, tell you what.
After a long pause, he spoke up, a hint of odd excitement in his voice.
""Yeah," Alby muttered.
You’ll see.
"We’ll make it work, I promise.
As if he was unsure.
"Uh … okay," Newt said slowly.
"Thomas could see that both Minho and Newt were as surprised as he was.
So … yeah, I’ll do whatever.
I don’t trust myself.
I’m just saying … I think I need to let you guys make the decisions.
I ain’t saying we should switch or any of that klunk.
Listen to me.
"That’s not what I meant.
"No!" Alby shouted, his face showing humility, surrender.
"Oh bloody—" Newt started.
He couldn’t believe Alby had just said that.
"Thomas held his breath.
I shouldn’t be the stupid leader anymore.
Seriously, I’m … sorry.
"You guys know I’m all screwed up.
Alby finally took a deep breath, then looked at each of them in turn.
The Gladers looked up to him.
"As much as he hated to admit it, Thomas knew they needed Alby if they were going to accomplish anything.
You gotta start talkin’ reason.
"Alby.
"Newt sat back down.
"Well, it sounds better than running to them.
But their leader didn’t look in the least bit reprimanded or remorseful.
Should we just sit around on our butts and wait to be snuffed by the Grievers?"Thomas wanted to stand up and cheer, sure that Alby would finally snap out of his doldrums.
Are you tellin’ me we have a choice?
"What’s wrong with you, man?
""Do what I want?" Newt asked, standing up.
Do what you want.
"Whatever.
"Alby scooted back on the bed and propped his feet up.
"Well, I don’t feel good askin’ Gladers to do something if I’m not bloody willing to do it myself.
Newt frowned, looked at the ground.
""With your bum leg?" Alby asked, a harsh laugh escaping his lips.
"And I’m sure all the Runners’ll do it.
"I will if I have to," Newt said, surprising Thomas; though he’d never talk about it, the older boy’s limp was a constant reminder that something horrible had happened to him out in the Maze.
Although it scared him to death, exploring the Maze—really exploring it—was something he’d wanted to do from the first time he’d learned about it.
"Everyone looked at Thomas; he simply nodded.
"And Thomas.
Who’d volunteer for that?""Me," Minho said.
We can’t freaking ask people to go out there and die, Minho!
"We have the Homestead to hide in—and if that ain’t workin’, the Map Room and the Slammer.
""No way," Alby said.
If they still move.
Time to stay out there and see if anything opens up when the walls move.
With open Doors and no sunset, there’s no point in coming back here, anyway.
"What do you mean, days?""I mean, days.
""What?" Alby asked, his voice finally showing some emotion.
We’ll pack our stuff shuck-full so we can stay out there a few days.
"Tomorrow morning, first thing, you guys can assign teams to study the Maps full-time while the Runners go out.
" He rubbed his hands together and sat forward in his chair.
We gotta quit boohooing and feeling sorry for ourselves.
"I’m with Thomas and Newt.
If Minho felt the same way, he did a good job of hiding it.
"Thomas rolled his eyes ever so slightly at Minho—so tired of Alby’s attitude.
Just because Greenie the freaking superboy made it doesn’t mean the rest of us can.
But you’ve seen what happens at night.
Good that.
Oh.
"Huh?
"Are you gonna pitch in?"Alby looked up, surprise crossing his face as if he hadn’t known that anyone else was in the room.
"Alby?" Newt asked.
The Changing had been aptly named, considering what it had done to him.
His face still wore the long, weary look of depression, his eyes sunken and hollow.
Thomas glanced over at Alby, who was staring at the floor, seemingly lost in his own gloomy thoughts.
If he could just make it to tomorrow, maybe he and Teresa could come up with something to help.
He agreed completely but had no concrete ideas on what to do.
"Thomas nodded, but didn’t say anything.
This or that, we gotta work our arses off till we’re dead or not dead.
The buggers who sent us here either want us dead or they’re givin’ us a spur.
But we can’t give up, and we all know it.
Supplies cut, bloody gray skies, walls not closing.
Shuck it all and kiss a Griever goodnight.
"Closest I’ve come so far," Newt was saying, "to hangin’ it all up.
The gray darkness seemed to press on the window from outside, with promises of bad things to come.
The only other furniture was a crooked wooden dresser and a small table, on top of which rested a lamp providing what light they had.
Alby and Newt sat on the only bed in the room while Thomas and Minho sat next to them in chairs.
When everyone was settled, Thomas found himself upstairs with Newt, Alby and Minho, and they were finally able to finish their discussion from earlier in the courtyard.
Despite the number of people and the chaos of such a change, a disturbing silence hung over the activities, as if no one wanted to draw attention to themselves.
The Keepers had organized and distributed the Gladers throughout the rooms, along with blankets and pillows.
Most of them slept outside in normal times, so packing all those bodies into the Homestead made for a tight fit.
The night had begun.
Just before it latched shut, Thomas thought he heard the first eerie moan of the Grievers, coming from somewhere deep in the Maze.
Thomas stepped inside as well, followed by Newt, who closed the door behind him.
"And before he could change his mind, he slipped away, heading around the corner toward the front door of the Homestead, just as the last couple of Gladers were entering, Newt shooing them in like errant chickens.
See you tomorrow.
"All right.
" Thomas managed his own smile at that.
"I don’t want your brutal murder on my conscience.
"You better go," she said.
At all.
" He stood there, really not wanting to leave.
"I wish.
You’ll get it soon, Teresa said in his mind.
He just hoped he could figure out how to talk back, so they could have a conversation.
" He’d accepted it now, almost wanted it.
I’ll try to answer back.
"And if you get lonely, you can talk to me with your…	trick all you want.
" Thomas tapped his right temple.
"That’s a promise, right?""Promise.
"I’ll make sure they let you out first thing tomorrow, okay?"She smiled, making him feel better.
"Thomas felt horrible leaving her there, but he knew he had no choice.
"I’m a tough girl—I’ll be okay.
" She looked past him at the Homestead, then focused on him again.
""Yeah….
"At least it won’t get completely dark—looks like we’re stuck with this twilight junk twenty-four hours a day now.
He stared into those glowing eyes.
She’d just have to suffer and make do.
But he knew that was a ridiculous idea.
He wanted to steal Newt’s keys and help her escape.
"Thomas felt an incredible sadness.
"I don’t know if I can do this—stay in this jail all night.
All he could see were her eyes, the pale glow of her white skin.
Yeah?"Her hands slipped back inside, disappeared.
"Oh, sorry.
Thomas realized he was staring off in a daze.
"Tom?" Teresa said.
He grinned inside—he could only imagine Newt’s response to that request.
" But he didn’t want to leave; he almost wished he could get thrown in the Slammer with her.
I just wanted to see you before I went inside for the night.
""Well, I guess it doesn’t matter right now.
Unless I just heard people talking while I was in the coma.
"It’s weird—I guess I do remember some stuff.
"Teresa, are you sure you’ve forgotten everything?"She thought a second.
"Though I guess a Griever can’t squeeze through this window, so I’ll be happy, right?"The mention of Grievers surprised him—he didn’t remember talking about them to her yet.
" She motioned behind her with a thumb.
Should be fun sleeping on this cold floor.
""Thanks for asking him.
It might actually be the safest place in the Glade.
"You’ll have to make it through the night in there.
" Thomas was just glad he’d gotten that much of a concession.
"Well, Newt said maybe tomorrow.
Thomas felt the ridiculous urge to reach out and touch them.
But first—can’t you get me out of here?" Her hands appeared, gripping the bars of the window.
"Yeah, I’ve been thinking the same thing.
He couldn’t help feeling some hope.
And what you wrote on your arm, and what you said about a code, it all has to mean something, right?" It has to, he thought.
"There’s gotta be a way out of this place—we just have to push it, stay out in the Maze longer.
Thomas agreed, but was anxious to say what he’d come to say.
"More than I can say for that Alby schmuck," she muttered.
" He paused to gather his thoughts.
"Listen, I’ve been thinking.
"You’re welcome," he answered, ignoring her sarcasm.
" In the darkness her blue eyes seemed to glow like a cat’s.
"Thanks.
"You can be downright spooky, ya know?""That’s very sweet," she said.
He let out a small yelp before he could stop it—it took him a second to recover his wits.
Her face popped up on the other side, startling him.
"Teresa?" he finally asked through the barred window of the lightless cell.
Thomas pulled up outside the small jail and caught his breath.
As he sprinted for the Slammer on the back side of the Homestead, he watched as Gladers started moving inside, most of them with arms full of one thing or another.
He decided to hurry and talk to Teresa before it was too late.
Thomas was happy with the conversation—it had gone about as well as he could’ve possibly hoped.
""Done it before, haven’t you, Hercules?" Without smiling or even waiting for a response, Newt walked away, yelling at people to finish up and get inside the Homestead.
"We can fight ’em off.
"Thomas nodded.
But right now we just gotta slim ourselves and get to the wake-up.
"That guy’s not too high on you two shanks.
""Alby’s the one who won’t let the girl out," Newt said with a nod toward the Homestead.
Buy time to analyze the Maze.
And maybe we could barricade or blow up the entrance to the Griever Hole.
"That’s exactly what I’m talking about.
""Exactly," Thomas said.
Stay out there while the walls move.
"Dig deeper.
"Newt thought a minute as he stood there, the bustle of the Glader preparations surrounding both of them.
We can’t live that way anymore, day to day, thinking that what matters most is getting back to the Glade before the Doors close, snug and safe.
We’ll be forced to.
"Because now we have to solve it.
"Thomas had an overwhelming feeling that all of these changes were a spur, a catalyst for the endgame.
It’s been two bloody years, ya know.
"Tommy, what’s gonna make tomorrow any different?
"Newt snorted.
Figure out what we’re supposed to do.
Tomorrow, when we have a whole day of safety, we can figure out what to do with her.
"Okay, we get through tonight, somehow.
"Thomas nodded, sensing a compromise.
She canhandle one night in there—if anything, she’ll be safer than us.
"You know what, I don’t buggin’ care right now.
"  Newt looked toward the Slammer.
Just because she was the trigger for the Ending doesn’t make her bad.
"And I think they sent me, too.
" Thomas took a deep breath.
She’s just a pawn—they sent her here as our last tool or hint or whatever to help us get out.
I don’t think she has anything to do with us being here.
Because she came and everything is suddenly do-or-die?""No, you’re missing the point.
"And that’s supposed to convince me that everything’s jolly—that I should let the girl go?
Newt rubbed his eyes.
" Thomas was relieved to get it off his chest.
One way or another.
We can’t live here forever— whoever sent us here wants it to end.
But it’s supposed to end somehow.
"I think … I think we’re here as part of some weird experiment, or test, or something like that.
He knew if there was anyone who would believe him, it would be Newt.
"Greenie, what’re you yappin’ about?"Ever since Thomas had seen the words on the wall of the Maze—world in catastrophe, killzone experiment department—he’d been thinking about them.
"Newt folded his arms; he looked exasperated.
"No, I don’t think that’s what it means—the walls not closing.
"Thomas groaned, wanting Newt to know how frustrated he felt.
I’ve heard some sucky plans in my day, Greenie, but that’s got ’em all beat.
""Yeah—end it by lettin’ the bloody Grievers waltz in here and kill us?
There’s something about her—I think she and I were sent here to help end this whole thing.
"Listen to me!
"Thomas grabbed his arm.
"Don’t waste my time, Tommy.
" Newt started walking off.
"Ah, glad to know you guys are buddies now.
" He knew that she could only help, that she might still remember something valuable.
"You’ve gotta let the girl go.
Thomas almost balked, not sure how to say what he was thinking.
"Make it quick," Newt said.
The older boy turned to give Thomas such an annoyed look he thought twice about saying anything.
"Newt stopped so suddenly Thomas almost ran into him.
"You have to listen to me.
"Newt!" he called out, running to catch up.
He finally found him, crossing the Glade on his way to the Blood House.
This hurt Thomas’s feelings, but he left anyway, really wanting to talk to Newt about something else.
Then Minho said he had a special assignment from Newt, and more or less told Thomas to get lost, refusing to answer any of his questions.
Thomas finally snuck away from the Builders and helped Minho, carrying up boxes of knives and barbwire-wrapped clubs.
Alby had made it clear they could take no chances: they’d make the Homestead their fortress, and must do whatever it took to defend it.
Others were gathering supplies and tools; Thomas saw Minho carrying weapons from the basement to the main building.
Frypan’s task was to take all the nonperishable food out of the kitchen and store it in the Homestead, in case they got trapped there—Thomas could only imagine how horrible that’d be.
Every flashlight in the compound was gathered and distributed to as many people as possible; Newt said he planned for everyone to sleep in the Homestead that night, and that they’d kill the lights, except for emergencies.
As Thomas worked, he caught glimpses of the other jobs going on across the Glade.
It looked ugly and pathetic and scared him to death—no way that’d keep the Grievers out.
Thomas helped as the Builders gathered every loose item they could find and piled them in the gaps, nailing things together as best they could.
co busy, wanted to delay the inevitable panic attacks.
It almost seemed to him as if the Keepers wantediDocpeople.
The Builders—without their leader, Gally, who was still missing—were ordered to put up barricades at each open Door; they obeyed, although Thomas knew there wasn’t enough time and there weren’t materials to do much good.
As Newt and Alby gathered the Keepers and put them in charge of making assignments and getting their groups inside the Homestead within the hour, Thomas felt like nothing more than a spectator, not sure how he could help.
Though there had been no discernible change in the light since the sun and blue sky hadn’t appeared that morning, it still felt like a darkness spread over the Glade.
The next thirty minutes were an eruption of mass confusion.
Teresa?Nothing.
She didn’t respond.
At least you’ll be safe in there.
I will.
But he tried anyway.
He didn’t know how to do it, how to talk to her like that.
Come see me, she said in his mind.
He already felt a closeness that could only have come from knowing her before the memory-wiped existence of the Glade.
Yet he knew that wasn’t true.
I don’t even know her .
But I just met her, he thought.
And he couldn’t believe how sad he felt—he wanted to keep talking to her.
It hurt Thomas even more to see how willingly she went.
"The two guards nodded, then walked away, Teresa in tow.
Swear your lives on it.
I don’t care what happens, no one’s gonna touch this girl.
"Stay with her.
Before they could enter the trees, though, Newt stopped them.
Billy and Jackson came forward and grabbed Teresa by both arms, started escorting her away.
Thomas had never wanted so badly to punch someone.
"Just be glad you ain’t goin’ with her, Thomas," Alby said; he gave both of them one last glare before leaving.
It felt like something had reached through his chest and squeezed his heart.
"Thomas turned to look at Teresa, paled at the sadness in her blue eyes.
She bloody admitted it herself.
"How could we not, Tommy?
"But … how could you possibly blame her for the walls not closing?"Newt stepped up, lightly placed a hand on Alby’s chest and pushed him back.
Alby, you can’t—" He stopped when Alby’s fiery eyes shot such a look of anger at him he felt his heart stutter.
"What’re you talking about?
"Teresa didn’t react, but Thomas did enough for the both of them.
Put her in the Slammer, and ignore every word that comes out of her shuck mouth.
Jackson!
Billy!
"I want her locked up.
Alby pointed at the girl.
Thomas felt as if his breath had solidified, lodged itself in his throat.
Teresa had been right from the beginning—everything had changed.
No sun, no supplies, no protection from the Grievers.
Everything would be different now.
"Thomas was speechless.
They didn’t close tonight.
The Doors.
"The walls, you shuck.
To bother noticing what freaking time it is!"Thomas looked at his watch, realizing with horror what he’d missed, knowing what Alby was about to say before he said it.
Too busy makin’ lovey eyes to bother lookin’ around?
I’ll tell ya what happened, shank.
"What happened?
"What happened?"But Alby grabbed him by the shirt.
""What’s wrong, Newt?" Thomas asked, not wanting to talk to Alby directly.
I don’t know what it means.
The Ending.
"Not on purpose, I swear it.
""I triggered something," she replied in a calm voice.
"First the sky, now this.
"What did you do!" Alby screamed.
But she didn’t reply.
"What did you do?"Thomas, confused by the question, glanced at Teresa to see if she knew what he meant.
"Alby looked at Teresa.
Neither can she.
I can’t remember anything.
That doesn’t mean anything!
I know her, she knows me—or at least, we used to.
"So what?
"Alby, I swear—""She came straight to you after waking up, shuck-face!"Anger surged inside Thomas—and worry that Alby would go off like Ben had.
"Thomas almost wilted.
co know who you are, who this shank girl is, and how you guys know each other.
iDoc"Iwanna.
" He pointed at Thomas’s chest, almost tapping it.
"I’m sick of this.
Alby stepped up.
Thomas stared back, wondering what was going through the older boy’s head.
He stood, silently, just staring at them.
"Newt turned back to face them, but his face showed anything but fear.
"Keep talking like that and you’ll be next.
" Teresa didn’t stop.
"You’re officially the first guy here to get your butt beat by a girl.
"Congrats, Jeff," Newt said.
"Thomas almost laughed as Newt turned to an older boy standing nearby, whose face had turned bright red.
"Guess he forgot to tell the little part about me kicking him in the groin and climbing out the window.
"Teresa stood up, surprising Thomas with her confidence.
Med-jack said you were there one second and buggin’ gone the next.
"How’d you get here?
Newt looked at Teresa.
Alby and a few others were right behind him.
"How in the …," he said as he pulled up in front of them.
"But before Teresa could answer, Newt was running out of the woods.
The sun disappeared and the sky’s gone gray, they didn’t send us the weekly supplies—looks like things are going to end one way or another.
"Yeah, well, things pretty much suck right about now.
"Thomas’s heart sank as he snapped back to reality and remembered how grim the world had become.
"Just like the rest of you.
"All I want is to get back home," she said, finally letting go of his hand.
A chill swept through Thomas that was surprisingly pleasant.
"He held out his hand for another shake, and she took it, holding on for a long time.
Guess I’ll trust you.
"Well, you look familiar to me and you claim we’re friends.
He felt pathetic, and embarrassed about hiding.
Like living in the woods, do ya?"Thomas tried to scowl, then smiled.
You know that, right?""Judging by your little hiding spot, I’d say you’re not so normal yourself.
"Everything about you is weird.
"Thomas was baffled by this girl—first the connection he’d felt to her from the very beginning, then the mind-speaking, now this.
In the commotion I wrote it down.
They had a pen and notepad next to the bed.
"When did you write it?""When I woke up.
"The three words ran through Thomas’s mind over and over.
"But don’t let me forget—it has to mean something.
"I can’t remember why I wrote this," she said as she wet her thumb and started rubbing off the words.
Then she focused on her arm.
"Teresa considered that for a moment, looking off into space.
"Just little lizardlike machines that spy on us for the Creators—the people who sent us here.
""What are those?" she asked.
The beetle blades.
"On the little creatures that live here.
" He searched his mind for what the phrase could possibly mean.
"I’ve seen that word— wicked.
WICKED is goodThomas’s heart beat faster.
"The letters were messy, but he could make them out when he got close enough.
"Read it yourself.
"What’s that?" he asked, leaning in for a better look.
co written across the skin in thin black ink.
Small lettersiDocwere.
" She pulled up the sleeve of her left arm, exposing her bicep.
""Was there anything else?" "Actually, yeah.
I can’t really remember why I said it.
I tried to reach out and grasp a few, and that was one of them.
"When I first woke up, it was like I’d entered an insane asylum— these strange guys hovering over my bed, the world tipping around me, memories swirling in my brain.
’ What did you mean?"She shook her head slightly.
You said ‘The Maze is a code.
"You said something to me—in my head—right before you found me over here.
" He sat back down and pulled his legs up, much like she had done.
""Well, can’t say I’m too anxious to try.
"How do you do that?""I just do, and I bet you can, too.
"There you go again," Thomas said aloud, though he was relieved that her trick didn’t really freak him out anymore.
I just don’t know, she said in his mind.
"Their eyes met for a long time; it looked like her mind was spinning, trying to make sense of it all.
You’re way ahead of me and everybody else.
I mean, the fact that you knew my memory had been wiped without asking me—and this other stuff.
"No, they’re not.
"Thomas knelt down in front of her.
"My memories are as useless as yours.
" She groaned, her face reddening.
I know I triggered the Ending, whatever that means.
That we came here for a reason.
That we’re smart.
All I have are faint impressions—that you and I were important, that we were used somehow.
"Save your breath and quit asking.
Any ideas?"Teresa followed him with her eyes as he walked back and forth.
That weird note you had about being the last person to ever come here, your coma, the fact you can talk to me telepathically.
"We need to figure things out.
He stood up, started pacing in front of her.
" Thomas felt fidgety, like he’d go nuts if he didn’t move.
But I think Newt just thinks I was stressed out or something.
""Well … when it first happened, I did.
They’d think we’re crazy.
"You didn’t tell anyone, did you?
"Teresa shrugged.
""Really clears things up.
"Anyway … it’s kind of like that.
""Well," she said, her eyes flickering as if she was embarrassed by his sudden gloom.
"Or who taught me.
" He paused, feeling a wave of sadness.
I mean … I remember riding one, but not learning.
But do you remember learning to ride one?""No.
I bet you could do it without thinking.
"It’s like if you tried to ride a bicycle here—if they had one.
Then she spoke aloud again.
No idea—I can just do it, she thought to him.
"How … did you talk to me inside my mind?"Teresa shook her head.
"What’s …," he began, not sure how to ask it.
A long moment passed, both of them looking toward the ground.
" Which was definitely the understatement of the day.
""So am I, trust me.
"And I’m scared.
"Yeah, we’re messed up," she said.
"Are we messed up or what?"She smiled for the first time, and he almost had to look away, as if something that nice didn’t belong in such a glum and gray place, as if he had no right to look at her expression.
utcoa bitter laugh.
" HeiDoclet.
Even though I don’t know what home is.
Tom makes me feel … like I’m at home or something.
Well, except Newt—he calls me Tommy.
"That’s your name, isn’t it?""Yeah, but most people call me Thomas.
Teresa rolled her eyes.
" As soon as it came out, he was sure he couldn’t have possibly said anything dumber.
"I like how you call me Tom.
"Almost in a daze, Thomas pulled the blanket completely off and leaned forward to shake her hand.
"But I know you’re my friend.
" She held a hand out.
""I … It’s all very confusing right now.
You just woke up.
Who told you?
""You know about the Maze?
It’s mostly empty, like I said.
Something about us.
Something about before we came to the Maze.
Teresa turned toward him.
""But how do you know me?" He felt like the walls were spinning around him.
Including you.
As if everything before this is just on the other side of a white curtain.
Like I have all these shelves in my head, labeled for memories and faces, but they’re empty.
Emotions.
"Feelings.
"I remember remembering," she muttered, sitting down with a heavy sigh; she pulled her legs up to wrap her arms around her knees.
" Thomas opened his mouth, then closed it without saying anything.
"I can’t explain it.
" She threw her arms up in disgust.
No.
"Yes.
"You mean … you remember me?" he asked, embarrassed at the squeak that escaped on the last word.
"Tom, do you really not remember me?" Her voice was soft, a contrast from the crazed, hard sound he’d heard from her after she first arrived, when she’d delivered the message that everything was going to change.
Black hair framed the fair skin of her face, with eyes the blue of pure flame.
Wearing a long-sleeved white shirt, blue jeans, and brown shoes, she looked—impossibly—even more striking than when he’d seen her in the coma.
She looked so different now, awake and alert—standing.
Teresa stood to his right, leaning against the massive stone wall.
Chills creeping up his spine, he slowly lowered the blanket.
A girl’s voice.
He’d heard it with his ears.
But no, it’d been … different.
"At first, Thomas thought it was another message in his head; he squeezed his fists against his ears.
"Forgetting about you was the worst part.
A few minutes passed, his heart finally calming to a slow roll.
Somehow, it seemed like a way to hide from Teresa’s intrusion into his mind.
He crouched in the corner, nestled in the ivy, and threw his blanket over himself, head and all.
He skirted the edge of the Glade, then, breaking into a run, he headed for his place of seclusion behind the Deadhead forest.
With everyone’s thoughts on the stranger waking up from her coma, it proved easy.
As soon as Newt set off to go and talk to the girl, Thomas silently slipped away, hoping no one would notice him in the excitement.
He didn’t want to see anybody.
Thomas didn’t want to see her.
The Maze is a code.
The Maze is a code, Tom.
Teresa paused, then said something that made no sense.
He couldn’t understand how she did it, how she was inside his head.
But it’s all fading….
I have to tell you things!
I’m forgetting everything but you….
It’s all fading… .
Come get me!
Tom, I don’t know any of these people.
But it was too late.
He wanted to run before it happened again, before she spoke to him in his mind.
The girl who spoke in his head.
The girl.
"The girl’s awake!"Thomas’s insides twisted; he leaned against the concrete wall of the Map Room.
"She’s awake!" Chuck yelled.
"What’s going on?" Newt asked.
Thomas could only wonder what crazy thing had happened now.
Chuck was in the group, and when he saw Thomas and the others he ran over, a look of excitement spread across his face.
A group of Gladers stood at the front door of the house, shouting to be heard over each other.
"But a commotion outside the Homestead shifted their attention away from the conversation.
Nothing we could build would keep them out.
"Shuck things can climb the bloody walls, remember?
""No way," Newt said.
"Maybe we could build something to block off thatcorridor.
"I don’t know what we can do," Minho said.
" Thomas couldn’t have agreed more.
Then murmured, "Hard to believe.
"Gotta bloody see that for myself," Newt said.
But for the first time, being treated like the Greenie didn’t bother him that much.
All three of them looked at him, annoyed, as if he had no right to speak.
"The Griever Hole," Thomas added.
"Must lead to where the … ya know … Grievers live," he said when finished.
"What?"Minho took a full three minutes to explain, starting with the Griever they followed and ending with the results of their rock-throwing experiment.
Newt raised his eyebrows.
"Thomas waited, hoping that Newt or Alby would have a positive reaction to the news, maybe even have further information to shed light on the mystery.
"We found something weird.
"Yeah, anyway," Minho continued.
Especially now.
Thomas hoped their leader didn’t bring up what he’d seen in the Changing—or anything related to Thomas, for that matter.
"Alby had folded his arms, still glaring at the Box as if trying to open the doors with his mind.
"No sun for the plants," Newt said, "no supplies from the bloody Box—yeah, I’d say we’re shucked, all right.
"Oh, we’re shucked for good now," Minho whispered, his reaction alerting Thomas to how grave the situation really was.
To Thomas, there seemed to be a shadow hovering over it darker than the gray air surrounding everything else.
"All four of them looked over at the steel doors attached to the ground.
But not today.
Come every week for two years, same time, same day.
"Bloody supplies didn’t come today.
"What else happened?"Newt answered, nodding toward the Box as he did so.
They’d been working hard all day and this was their thanks?"What do you mean?" Minho asked.
Thomas thought, feeling his own anger light up.
What’s wrong with him?
" He shot Thomas a nasty glare as if it were all his fault.
"Cuz this whole shuck place is fallin’ to pieces.
"Oddly, Alby almost looked disappointed.
Yeah, we did find something, actually.
"Nice to see you, too.
Anything?"Minho actually recoiled at the harsh rebuke, but his face seemed more confused to Thomas than hurt or angry.
Find anything?
"Ain’t got time to waste.
"We were just—""Get on with it," Alby interrupted.
"Hey," Minho said.
Thomas’s excitement immediately turned to worry.
"They’d just stepped outside the Map Room, the heavy door clanging shut behind them, when Newt and Alby walked up, neither one of them looking very happy.
Walls moving, straight lines, patterns … There had to be an answer.
It was like a prick in his side.
"Thomas put the papers in the trunk and closed it, hating the twinge of unease he felt.
"You can always come back and study your butt off after dinner, after we talk to Newt and Alby.
Minho tapped him on the shoulder.
He had such a heavy feeling that he was missing an obvious hint or clue.
Pointing to something?
co different kind of map?
All those straight lines—were they suggesting aniDocentrely.
Patterns.
The Maze walls, moving.
"Thomas had an itch in the back of his mind, the same one he’d felt the very first time in this room.
Like I said, it sucks.
Just can’t find it yet.
I know there’s something there, something that’ll help us.
You really need to study several weeks, look for patterns, anything.
But looking at two days’ worth isn’t gonna tell you jack.
"Patterns.
"What am I looking for?" he asked.
Thomas knelt down in front of it and took out the Map from the day before and held it up side by side with the one he’d just drawn.
"Minho got up and walked over to the Section One trunk and opened it.
"For a Greenie, anyway.
"Not bad," Minho said.
Pride washed through him—it was just as good as any other Map he’d seen.
" He was annoying but helpful, and fifteen minutes after entering the room, Thomas examined his finished product.
"I think that hall was actually cut off here, not there," and "Watch your proportions," and "Draw straighter, you shank.
He sat down at the table and drew up the day’s Map based on his memory and notes, Minho looking over his shoulder the whole time, giving pointers.
He knew he should also be exhausted, but he was too excited to feel it—he couldn’t wait to see Newt’s and Alby’s reactions to the news about the Cliff.
The hopelessness in the room made Thomas feel as if he were walking through mud-thick water.
No one said a word, as if all speculation on the new sky had been exhausted.
"There were already other Runners milling about the room, drawing up their Maps when they entered.
"But yeah, we’ll do it quick so we can talk to them.
" Thomas followed him to the steel door of the big concrete block and Minho turned to give him a wan smile.
"Aren’t you dying to tell Newt and Alby about the Griever Hole?""Hey, we’re still Runners," Minho said, "and we still have a job.
He thought it was the last thing they should do.
Thomas was surprised.
Minho headed straight for the Map Room as they came through the West Door.
The dim light hadn’t changed a bit since they’d woken up that morning, and Thomas wondered if anything would change at "sunset" either.
A somber mood rested over the Glade, an easy thing to happen when all is gray.
" And so they’d gone back.
Not yet.
"Not yet, dude.
Minho seemed to sense it and grabbed his shoulder.
When they reached the final dead end and it was time to head back home, Thomas felt an almost uncontrollable urge to bag everything and stay there overnight, see what happened.
It was hard for him to notice any changes from the day before, but Minho pointed out without thinking about it where the walls had moved.
Thomas did the vine cutting and all the note-taking.
Thomas and Minho found nothing but stone walls and ivy.
Thomas reluctantly followed and they ran into the gray-dark Maze.
Finally, without saying a word, Minho turned to leave.
Several minutes passed in silence and Thomas realized his friend must be as fascinated as he was.
"Thomas sat and stared, waiting for Minho to make a move.
""Yeah, good a name as any.
"The Griever Hole.
co doorway.
" "And probably where they come from," Thomas said as he took one last look at theiDochdden.
Don’t know how it helps, but at least we know now where the shuck Grievers go.
We’ll tell Newt and Alby about this tonight.
With our new decorated sky, maybe other weird things have happened out there.
"Better get as much of the Maze run as we can.
" Minho got up with a grunt and put on his backpack.
"Yeah, jacked up is right.
His mind craved to know what kind of technology could be behind it all.
" And, Thomas admitted to himself, kind of cool.
This place is all jacked up.
Some kind of optical illusion or hologram, hiding a doorway.
Must be something like our sky turning gray.
What’re we looking at?""Like you said, it’s not magic.
"How’s this possible, dude?
"Minho finished drawing, then looked up at the special spot.
If I could jump it, I’m sure it’s easy for them.
"And when they come out, they must balance on the rim of the hole and jump over the empty space to the Cliff edge—it’s not that far.
" Thomas kept his eyes riveted to the area of the invisible floating square, trying to burn the distance and location in his mind, remember exactly where it was.
""The Grievers must barely fit through that thing.
"It’s kind of small.
"No wonder we missed it," Minho said, furiously writing down notes and dimensions, his best attempt at a diagram.
To Thomas’s surprise, the spot in which the rocks disappeared proved only to be a few feet square.
"They threw the rest of the rocks, aiming at the original spot and every inch around it.
"I mean, it should be impossible—sometimes you don’t look very hard for things you don’t believe will or can happen.
"Maybe you weren’t looking carefully other times you threw stuff over," Thomas said.
And once again, it winked out of existence.
" Minho did, throwing it at the same spot.
"Do it again—maybe we blinked weird or something.
"Thomas coughed; his throat felt raw.
Never.
I never saw anything disappear.
"How could we have ever missed that?
"We’ve thrown stuff off the Cliff before," Minho said.
Thomas couldn’t speak.
Next second gone.
One second there, falling.
Then it vanished, as if it had fallen through a plane of water or mist.
This one left Minho’s hand, sailed forward, almost in the exact center of the Cliff line, started its descent to the unseen ground far below.
Thomas had watched, deeply concentrating on each and every rock.
Minho had thrown a large chunk, a piece that had fallen from one of the cracks in the wall.
It was the strangest, most hard-to-believe thing Thomas had ever seen.
Then Minho’s next rock disappeared.
He couldn’t help chiding himself—it’d been a stupid idea.
Thomas’s discouragement grew with every toss, until it turned into a heavy mass of blah.
They threw enough rocks to cover the entire left half of the area in front of them, covering the distance anyone—or anything—could possibly jump.
All the rocks fell.
Another line out, another line back.
Thomas kept following Minho’s orders—they continued until they’d marked a line reaching at least a dozen feet from the Cliff, then moved their target pattern a foot to the right and started coming back toward the Maze.
Each rock fell to the depths.
Then Minho.
Thomas threw another one, another foot out.
cofar below.
It alsiDocfell.
He tossed his rock just a foot or so farther out than Thomas had.
Minho went next.
Then disappeared into the gray emptiness.
And fell.
The jagged piece of stone fell.
"Thomas took a rock and carefully threw it to their left, just in front of where the left wall of the corridor leading to the Cliff met the edge.
If there’s some kind of magical exit, hopefully it’ll work with rocks, too— make them disappear.
Okay, let’s take turns tossing them, zigzagging back and forth out there.
"Minho picked up a rock from their pile.
"You’d wanna hold on to one beauty of a rope.
Being this close to a place where Grievers might come out at any second was making him sweat.
""That shank oughtta be the Keeper of the Runners," Thomas said, trying to make a joke to hide his fear.
If there’s some kind of optical illusion hiding an exit from this place, I don’t wanna be the one who screws up when the first shank tries to jump into it.
And memorize it in that shuck head of yours, too.
"All right, we gotta take good notes.
Minho pulled out his pad and pencil, placed them on the ground next to him.
Thomas looked down and saw nothing but a gray descent.
When they finally had a sizable pile, they hauled it over right next to the edge and took a seat, feet dangling over the side.
They got more by thumbing cracks in the wall, spilling broken chunks onto the ground.
"Thomas helped Minho as they scrabbled around the corners and crannies of the Maze, picking up as many loose stones as possible.
There has to be some kind of hidden exit.
Let’s get some rocks and test this place out.
"Got any better ideas?""One thing at a time, Greenie.
Wanna hang out with the Grievers, have a sandwich, maybe?"Thomas felt his hopes drop.
"There’s your death wish again.
Minho laughed.
" A thrill of excitement shot through him.
""If they can leave this way," Thomas added, continuing Minho’s line of reasoning, "so could we.
Looks like magic, but so does the sun disappearing.
"Not much doubt anymore—somehow the Grievers can leave the Maze this way.
" He pointed out at the abyss.
Anyway, then this.
"Hmm.
"Minho looked over at him, contemplative.
"Maybe not such a trick.
""Tricked?" Thomas said.
Then those suckers we tricked into jumping past us.
"That dead Griever I found—it ran this way, and we never saw it come back or go deeper into the Maze.
" Thomas knew what he meant, but waited for Minho’s explanation anyway.
""Yeah.
Something’s up.
"We’ve seen it three times now.
"Settles what?" Thomas asked.
Nothing but a wall of blankness.
There was no sign of anything, to the left, right, down, up, or ahead, for as far as he could see.
Thomas stood next to him on the edge of the Cliff, staring at the gray nothingness beyond.
"That settles it," Minho said.
The creature disappeared from sight, a shadow swallowed by more shadow.
Then Thomas stared in shock as up ahead the Griever dug in with its spikes and spun forward right up to the Cliff’s edge, then off, into the gray abyss.
Minho stopped so abruptly Thomas almost ran him over.
The Griever was charging toward that sky.
This went on for ten minutes, until they came to the long hallway that ended at the Cliff, where beyond lay nothing but the lifeless sky.
Each time he whispered back to Thomas that he’d seen the tail end of the Griever disappearing around the next turn.
At every turn, they slowed so the Keeper could look around the corner first.
He sprinted down the long corridor after Minho, turned left, then right.
Though his instincts told him not to, Thomas followed.
Minho took off running in the direction where he’d seen the Griever.
Come on!"Minho didn’t wait for a response, didn’t see the look of horror Thomas had just felt widen his own eyes.
"Crap—it’s gone!
" He took another peek, then quickly looked over his shoulder.
Let’s just watch it awhile—if it comes after us, we’ll run back to the Glade.
"We have to go that way to get to our section.
Minho paused a few seconds, thinking before he spoke.
"What do we do?" Standing so close to a Griever seemed like a really bad idea.
""Well?" Thomas raised his hands to his sides in frustration.
"Is it coming toward us?""No, idiot—I just told you it was sitting there.
He tried to ignore the panic flaring inside him.
""What do we do?" Thomas asked, as quietly as possible.
"It’s just sitting up there—almost like that dead one we saw.
His voice was still a whisper.
Minho’s head jerked back and he turned to face Thomas.
Thomas wanted to scream at him to be careful.
Very slowly, he leaned forward to take a peek.
He let go of Thomas’s shirt and took a step back, then crept up to the corner around which he’d seen the Griever.
Minho simply nodded, then put his finger to his lips.
"Thomas widened his eyes in question, felt his heart pick up the pace, even though it had already been pumping hard and steady.
"There’s a freaking Griever up there.
"Shh," Minho whispered.
He jumped back and grabbed Thomas by the shirt, pushing him against the wall.
He’d just rounded a corner to the right when he slammed to a stop, his feet almost skidding out from under him.
Minho was a few feet ahead of Thomas.
They saw the Griever before they’d even made it to the door leading from Section Eight to Section One.
fcor his second day of training, below a bleak and colorless sky.
After a lot of deliberation, he decided to keep his mouth shut and went running with iDocMnho.
They’d think he’d really gone bonkers, maybe even lock him up—and for good this time.
But he didn’t know what it meant, and he didn’t want them to know he had a girl’s voice in his head.
Everybody.
Thomas couldn’t knock the feeling that he should tell somebody.
What had she meant by the Ending?
His thoughts were churning too much about the gray sky and what Teresa—at least, he thought it had been the girl—had told him in his mind to participate in any conversation.
"Thomas was quiet as he and Minho got their things ready and ate a lightning-fast breakfast.
Come on, let’s go.
"Man— what a way to wake up.
" He looked up toward the sky.
Maybe soon, though.
"No, not yet.
Explore the walls a little more closely?"Minho shook his head.
"You mean we’re going to stay out there overnight?
A mixture of excitement and dread swept over him when he realized what Minho was saying.
Despite all his ideas—all the things he’d pitched to Minho—he wasn’t eager to change how things had been done for the last two years.
"The last statement struck Thomas deep down.
I think the desperation level just went up a notch.
If the sun’s really gone, won’t be long before plants and animals drop dead, too.
"If anything, gives us even more reason to get our butts out there.
"Don’t you have some sloppin’ to do?" He looked from Chuck to Thomas.
"Of course we are, shank," Minho said.
Thomas was glad the boy had asked the question for him.
"You’re still going out there?" Chuck asked, clearly surprised as well.
For some reason he’d expected the weird sky to throw all normal plans out the window.
We’re already late.
"Quit your leisure time with Chucky here and let’s get going.
""Thomas!" Minho was running up to them.
But I’m sure Newt and Alby’ll figure things out.
Not a clue.
"No clue, Chuck.
He felt awkward.
What’s going on, Thomas?"Thomas reached out and squeezed the younger boy’s shoulder.
"Yeah, where is it coming from?
Where’s that coming from?"Chuck’s eyes widened, as if the darkest, deepest secret of the universe had just been revealed to him.
Plus, there’s still enough light to see by, as faint as it is.
But you can’t just make the sun disappear from space.
Must be things about this place we obviously don’t understand.
I don’t know.
"Oh.
Thomas felt like he needed time to think about it all.
"What’d you mean by broken?" Chuck repeated.
"Yeah?" Thomas’s mind felt hazy.
"Thomas?" Chuck asked, lightly tapping him on the upper arm.
And that couldn’t be a good thing.
Whatever the explanation, whatever that had been in the sky, the real sun or not, it was gone.
A sour rot crept into his belly.
It couldn’t be a coincidence, could it?
She’d said, I just triggered the Ending.
What’s that supposed to mean?"Before Thomas could answer, the faint memory of last night, before he fell asleep, came to him, Teresa’s words inside his mind.
"Broken?
"Chuck finally quit gawking and made eye contact with Thomas.
I mean, maybe it’ll be back.
"Maybe something’s broken.
Like the ceiling of a massive room.
The sky did look like a ceiling.
cor the second time in twenty- four hours, Chuck had nailed it.
"F.
"Yeah, makes you wonder about this plaiDoce.
" Thomas followed Chuck’s gaze and looked up.
"Looks like a big gray ceiling—close enough you could almost touch it.
Thomas thought his neck must hurt something awful.
"What do you think happened?" Chuck said, a pitiful tremor in his voice, his eyes glued to the sky.
Chuck found him, and the look of fear on the boy’s face pinched Thomas’s heart.
And it was obvious from the other Gladers’ reactions that none of them had figured this out until now.
But he knew it to be true —it was the only explanation his rational mind could accept.
Thomas didn’t know what that meant, didn’t know how it was possible.
Everything about this place was fake.
Somehow, it had been fake.
In other words, the sun that had shone down on these people for two years, providing heat and life to everything, was not the sun at all.
Artificial.
Their sky had to have been—and still was—fabricated.
A sun couldn’t just disappear.
And whatever it was, to Thomas it meant one thing: the fact they could no longer see the sun probably meant they’d never been able to in the first place.
No, there had to be a scientifically acceptable reason for what they were witnessing.
But he and all the Gladers were far too rational and intelligent to conclude such a thing.
Though that was what it seemed like—signs of the ball of furious fire nowhere to be seen, the slanting shadows of morning absent.
The sun obviously had not disappeared—that wasn’t possible.
It was, in fact, ridiculous.
And it surprised him that so many of the others looked like lost chicks thrown from the coop.
In truth, as Thomas silently watched the commotion, he didn’t feel nearly as panicked or frightened as his instincts told him he ought to be.
But there was something about the largest object in the solar system vanishing that tended to disrupt normal schedules.
Based on the time, breakfast should’ve already been served, people should be working.
Thomas found most of the Gladers standing near the entrance to the Box, pointing at the dead sky, everyone talking at once.
The sun had disappeared.
Just gray.
Not cloudy, not twilight, not the early minutes of dawn.
But it was all gray.
He glanced upward again, half expecting it to have changed back to normal.
The brilliance of the sun should’ve awakened him—had done so easily since he’d arrived at the Glade.
He looked down at his watch—it was a full hour past his mandatory waking time.
Colorless and dead.
The sky, every last inch of it, was slate gray.
There was no blue, no black, no stars, no purplish fan of a creeping dawn.
He jumped to his feet, put his hand on the wall to steady himself as he craned his neck to gawk toward the heavens.
The sky was a dull slab of gray—not the natural pale light of morning.
And then he looked up, through the leafy canopy of branches.
But then he heard the shouts.
His first thought was that he must’ve gotten up earlier than usual, that dawn was still an hour away.
Thomas awoke to a weak, lifeless light.
But he heard it all the same, and remembered every word:Tom, I just triggered the Ending.
The next morning, when everything started going crazy, he’d wonder if the voice had been real or part of a dream.
He was somewhere very close to sleep when a voice spoke in his head, a pretty, feminine voice that sounded as if it came from a fairy goddess trapped in his skull.
Every ounce of the noble courage he’d felt, the will to make a difference, the promise to himself to reunite Chuck with his family—it all vanished into an exhausted fog of hopeless, wretched weariness.
After one day.
Being a Runner had lost its glamour.
Especially when it seemed so pointless.
Wondering how he could possibly do the same thing tomorrow.
Before twilight faded to blackness, he was already in his new favorite spot in the forest corner, curled up against the ivy, wondering if he could ever run again.
Chuck tried talking to him several times, but all Thomas could do was nod and shake his head, only half hearing, he was so tired.
Then there were the walls closing and dinner.
He and Minho made it back to the Glade, went to the Map Room, wrote up the day’s Maze route, compared it to the previous day’s.
The rest of the day was a blur of exhaustion to Thomas.
He followed.
"Minho blew out a big puff of air and kept running, and Thomas did the only thing he knew to do.
" "Smartest thing you’ve said yet, Greenie.
"This sucks.
"Thomas looked straight ahead, feeling so hopeless he almost slowed to a stop.
But if you think we’re gonna find a nice little gate that leads to Happy Town, you’re smokin’ cow klunk.
Because it’s here—gotta be a reason.
"Why bother?
"Then why even bother coming out here?"Minho looked over at him.
"This made Thomas doubt the whole point of what they were doing.
"How do you know?" "Because people willing to send Grievers after us aren’t gonna give us an easy way out.
"Thomas felt the heavy truth of it, but pushed back anyway.
Solid.
A wall is a wall is a wall.
It’s just more of the same.
"There’s no exit.
Why do you ask it that way?"Minho shook his head, spat a big wad of something nasty to his left.
A secret trapdoor or something?" "I don’t know … maybe.
You really think there’s an exit anywhere?
Plus, think about it.
Remember what I said earlier—can’t take any chances.
"But—"                                       "Just shut it, dude.
He finally pulled in stride with Minho.
Thomas followed, frustrated that they couldn’t take time to examine the walls, explore a little.
" Without waiting for a response, the Keeper turned and set off at a run in the direction from which they’d just come.
"Gotta go back.
"Nothing new?""Just the usual changes to the way we got here—day’s half over," Minho replied as he looked at his watch emotionlessly.
"Thomas sucked in a deep breath, trying not to think about only being halfway done for the day.
"Time to go back.
"The last dead end," he said to Thomas.
It was straight, the walls, solid, with no hallways branching off.
An hour after lunch, Minho stopped at the end of a long corridor.
And off they went, those six words burning holes in his mind.
"Reluctantly, Thomas let the vines fall back into place and swung his backpack over his shoulders.
""Yeah, real nice, Greenie.
Real nice.
Experiment.
Killzone.
Catastrophe.
"Not much here that sounds very good.
"Thomas turned back to stare at the sign, trying to suppress the feeling of doom that had risen inside him.
I quit bothering to look at ’em a long time ago.
They’re all over the place, like freaking labels for the nice pretty Maze they built.
"I don’t know, shank.
"What’s this?" It gave him a chill—it had to have something to do with the Creators.
WORLD IN CAT AST ROP HE:KILLZONE EXP ERIMENT DEP ART MENTHe read the words aloud, then looked back at Minho.
He put his hand out to run his fingers across them, as if he didn’t believe his eyes.
Thomas reached in and pulled apart the curtains of ivy, then stared blankly at a square of metal riveted to the stone with words stamped across it in big capital letters.
"Oh, yeah, that," Minho said, his voice completely indifferent.
"What’s that?" he interrupted, heading for a dull glimmer of gray he’d just noticed behind the ivy on the wall, about head high.
"Can’t wait to rip their—"But before the Keeper could finish, Thomas was on his feet and across the corridor.
" Minho’s face reddened as he squeezed his hands together like he was choking someone.
"Anybody have a clue?""We don’t know jack about the stupid Creators.
He hated the people behind the Maze.
""Who is them, anyway?" Thomas asked, ready for more answers.
Only thing we can reckon.
For them.
But they have to be spies.
"And we don’t know what that word means—probably just something to scare us.
" Minho finished up his meal and put his lunch box away.
"And why do they have the word wicked written on their backs?""Never been able to catch one.
Then Thomas remembered what he’d seen in the Maze—so much had happened he hadn’t had the chance to mention it.
They seemed to be everywhere.
"What’s the deal with those beetle blades?" he asked.
He caught a flash of silver and red, something he’d seen more than once that day.
"Thomas took a long swig of water, looking up at the ivy-covered wall opposite them.
Nothing to get your skinny butt excited about.
co movements.
"Just the usualiDocwall.
Minho reached down and patted his backpack, where his notes rested.
"Anything different today?" Thomas asked, curious.
He knew Minho would make them get up and go once the food disappeared, so he took his time.
Thomas relished every bite of his sandwich and veggies, eating as slowly as possible.
They sat on the ground, leaning against the soft ivy as they ate lunch, neither one of them talking much.
Finally, Minho stopped and pulled off his backpack once more.
Good shape or not, Thomas was feeling the pain.
Thomas ran right behind Minho for two more hours, sprinkled with little breaks that seemed to get shorter every time.
Something about that Griever being dead and then not dead, something about where it had gone once it sprang to life …Frustrated, he put it aside and sprinted to catch up.
As Thomas followed, he struggled to figure out what was tickling the back of his mind.
" And with that Minho turned and started running.
Come on, we gotta go.
Don’t you?" He was quiet for a second, then, "Haven’t you ever thought of following them?""Man, you do have a death wish, don’t you?
Where they always go.
"I just wonder where it went.
"Thomas’s mind was churning, trying to get somewhere, only he didn’t know where or which direction to even start in.
Then boom, it was back to life.
Shuck thing just looked dead—like a wax statue.
"No.
Minho thought for a minute.
Did you see an injury or anything?" Thomas didn’t know what kind of answer he was searching for, but he was sure there had to be a clue or lesson to learn from what happened.
""What could’ve been wrong with it?
"Yeah, I guess—maybe it needed to get recharged or something.
""So it ran away from you guys?" From what Thomas had seen only a few nights before, he couldn’t imagine it.
It seemed like it was mostly just trying to get out of there, and poor Alby was in the way.
Something was wrong with it, though—didn’t really attack like usual.
Alby poked at it with his foot like an idiot and that bad boy suddenly sprang to life, spikes flaring, its fat body rollin’ all over him.
"Well, shuck thing wasn’t dead.
He looked ready to go.
Obviously the Griever woke up, but what happened?"Minho had already put his backpack on.
"You never really told me what happened to Alby that day—why he was in such bad shape.
For some reason, his thoughts turned back to the day Minho and Alby had gone to look at the dead Griever—when everything had gone to klunk.
He took a bite of his apple, feeling surprisingly refreshed.
"Thomas stopped drinking, sucked in a big satisfied breath, then burped.
"Save some for later.
"Slow down there, fishhead," Minho yelped.
He guzzled his water, relishing the wet coolness as it washed down his dry throat.
Thomas didn’t have to be convinced to follow Minho’s lead.
" He swung off his pack and pulled out some water and an apple.
"Break time.
After they’d run awhile—Thomas had no idea for how long or how far, but he guessed three miles—Minho slowed to a walk, then stopped altogether.
On they went.
But by his tenth attempt, he could almost match Minho at the task.
ivy,co and once he nicked his finger.
First couple of times, he had to sprint to catch up after cuttingiDocthe.
"Thomas was happier than he thought he’d be at having something to do, though it took him a while to become good at it.
We pick ’em up as we come back, or kick ’em to the side.
"Cut the ivy now—you gotta get used to doing it on the run.
""What?" Thomas hadn’t really expected to do anything but run and watch on his first day.
"Your turn.
"All right," the Keeper said, breathing heavier now.
Thomas couldn’t help being impressed—Minho didn’t even need to slow down to do it.
After every turn, Minho cut and dropped a three -foot length of ivy.
"On they went, following the course of the Maze, sometimes turning right, sometimes turning left.
"I’m Hansel, you’re Gretel.
"Bread crumbs," Minho replied.
Such odd glimpses of his past had almost stopped surprising him.
"Bread crumbs?" Thomas asked, the old fairy tale popping into his mind.
He threw it on the ground behind him and kept running.
As he did so, he pulled one of his knives from a pocket and, without missing a beat, cut a big piece of ivy off the wall.
They had three possible choices, but Minho went to the right without hesitating.
They ran for a short while before they reached an intersection.
Minho did make it sound easy.
"Thomas was intrigued.
Easy-peasy, dude.
Then I can use yesterday’s Map to make today’s.
Mostly just related to stuff from yesterday—what’s different today.
"But about every fifth turn, I write something down to help me later.
"I rely … mostly on memory," the Keeper huffed, his voice finally showing a hint of strain.
Thomas wondered what he’d written, but Minho answered him before he could pose the question.
He jotted a note, then put them back, never fully stopping.
When they reached the end of the passage, Minho slowed to barely more than a walk and reached behind him to pull out a notepad and pencil from a side pocket in his backpack.
They ran down a long corridor to the right, passing several turns to the left.
He hoped it was only jitters, that his breathing would steady soon.
"Thomas followed him, surprised at how heavy his breaths had already become.
Like I said, this passage is always in the same spot, but the route here might be a little different because of the walls rearranging themselves.
"This leads from Section Eight—the middle left square—to Section One—the top left square.
Minho ran straight through it without stopping.
They finally made it to a rectangular cut in a long wall to the north that looked like a doorway without a door.
Thomas kept up with Minho as best he could, having to sprint every once in a while to catch back up.
Though the sun had a few hours before hitting the noon spot up above, there was plenty of light to see by.
The early-morning light had a sharp sheen about it, making everything look bright and crisp—the ivy, the cracked walls, the stone blocks of the ground.
" They went through the West Door into Section Eight and made their way down several corridors, Thomas right beside Minho as he turned right and left without seeming to think about it, running all the while.
" "Then let’s go runnin’.
"I’m ready.
You ready or not?"Thomas looked at Minho, matched his suddenly hard gaze.
""No ‘ums’ around here.
"Um … yeah.
It was actually here—they were going for real now, no more talking and thinking about it.
Ready?"Thomas felt a wire of nervousness tighten inside him, pinching his gut.
"Well, we gotta bust it fast since we took time in here—you’ll just be following me around your first few days.
" Minho carefully returned the papers and closed the trunk, then stood.
We can’t give up.
"Right on, bro.
He’d said "we" without even thinking about it, and realized he was truly part of the Glade now.
" Thomas said it in a matter-of- fact tone, as a resigned repeat of what Minho had said a moment earlier.
""But we can’t give up.
Really freaking sucks.
Really sucks, dude.
Even more honest—we don’t know what we’re looking for.
If I gotta be honest, we haven’t figured out jack yet.
Each Runner is in charge of the Map for his own Section.
As he flipped through them, he explained, "We compare day to day, week to week, month to month, just like I was saying.
Minho pulled several sheets from the trunk, the Maps from the last few days.
As bad as things were, giving up would only make them worse.
"Thomas nodded, relieved at the attitude.
Ever.
Can’t take a chance that one day, in one spot, somewhere, an exit might appear.
It’s kind of depressing, but we don’t know what else to do.
Anything developing?"Minho shrugged.
""Are you close?
Not until something about these patterns gives a clue that an exit might open up, even temporarily.
Least not yet.
There’s no way we can ask the Runners to risk staying out there—no way.
Plenty of food, protection from theGrievers.
cointhe Glade might not be sweet livin’, but at least it’s safe.
"Lfe.
" Minho returned his gaze to the Maps in the trunk, much to Thomas’s reliefiDoc.
"Yeah, well.
He shuddered at the thought.
And he certainly agreed—he’d much rather come home safe and sound to the Glade every night than ensure another battle with the Grievers.
" He suddenly felt like a piece of klunk.
Sorry.
Like your chances of surviving again, do ya?"Thomas’s face reddened in shame.
You wanna spend another night out there?
A few tried it in the very beginning—all of them showed up dead.
"We’ve been bustin’ our butts for two years, and all you can ask is why we’re too sissy to stay out there all night?
" "What?" Thomas was shocked—he hadn’t meant it that way.
Seriously.
"That’s kind of insulting, dude.
"Haven’t you gotten desperate enough to stay out there overnight, see if maybe something opens while the walls are moving?"Minho looked up at him, a flash of anger in his eyes.
""It’s been two years," Thomas said.
Never been an exit.
But we’ve yet to see an exit open up that will lead us out of the square.
And we did—the mazes basically repeat themselves about every month.
We’ve always thought that comparing these day to day, week to week, would help us figure out a pattern.
As soon as we did, we started keeping track.
"We figured out the walls were moving right at the beginning.
The latest one said it was day number 749.
In the top right corners, Section 8 was scribbled, followed by the name Hank, then the word Day, followed by a number.
Each of the ones Thomas could see were very similar: a rough sketch of a square maze, filling almost the whole page.
The trunk was large enough that four stacks of Maps could fit, and all four reached the top.
"Thomas had already gotten up; he leaned over Minho’s shoulder and took a look.
"Come here.
" Minho stood and stepped over to the trunk right behind them, knelt down, then lifted the lid and rested it against the wall.
"So … it takes you a whole day to run through these little squares?""Hilarious.
He pointed at Section Three.
"For some reason that last statement worried Thomas, though he hoped it didn’t show on his face.
Don’t worry, it’s been a while since a Runner was killed.
"No, we’re just training you—someone’ll probably want a break.
Did somebody get killed?"Minho shook his head.
"Am I … replacing someone?
"Thomas had a depressing—and scary—thought.
"That’s why those things are shuck full of Maps.
" Minho glanced over at one of the trunks.
It takes us a whole day to map out our area—hoping against hope there’s an exit—then we come back and draw it up, a separate page for each day.
One for each Section.
"We always have at least eight Runners, including the Keeper.
" Thomas returned to the crude map, trying to visualize the Maze and see stone walls where Minho had penciled lines.
""Oh.
It’s just the ones a little deeper out.
""Those main corridors right outside the Doors don’t ever change.
"I didn’t see anything move that night we got stuck out there.
"Thomas looked up, happy to be able to offer a piece of information.
At least, we think that’s when, because we never really hear walls moving any other time.
"The walls move all over the shuck place every evening—same time as our Doors close shut.
" Minho tapped the Map.
co approaching an exit is the Cliff, and that ain’t a very good one unless you like falling to a horrible death.
The only thiDocngeven.
"So we have the Glade, surrounded by eight Sections, each one a completely self-contained square and unsolvable in the two years since we began this freaking game.
Thomas picked it up, completely fascinated that the Maze was so structured, and studied it as Minho kept talking.
" He finished, then slid the paper over to rest in front of Thomas.
They stay in the same spot, but the route there changes with the wall movements every night.
"You know about the ones from the Glade, but there are four more out in the Maze that lead to Sections One, Three, Five, and Seven.
"These are the Doors," Minho said.
Lastly, he drew little notches here and there.
He wrote the word GLADE in the middle, then numbered the outside squares from one to eight, starting in the upper left corner and going clockwise.
Then he filled it with smaller boxes until it looked exactly like an enclosed tic- tac-toe board, three rows of three squares, all the same size.
Thomas leaned in to get a better look and saw that Minho had drawn a big box that filled almost the entire page.
"As Thomas sat down, Minho grabbed a piece of paper and a pencil and started drawing.
"Have a seat, I want you to get a couple of images in your head before we go out there.
" Minho pulled out two chairs and sat in one of them.
""I kinda like the smell.
"Too bad it smells like an abandoned copper mine.
He took in a deep breath.
"Thomas was slightly disappointed—he’d been expecting something more profound.
"As happy a place as you could ever visit.
"Welcome to the Map Room," Minho said.
Closed, they were evenly spaced, two to a wall.
The only other items in the room were eight trunks, just like the one containing the knives in the weapons basement.
Neatly stacked piles of paper and pencils lay about the table’s surface, one for each chair.
A wooden table stood in the exact center, eight chairs tucked in around it.
About twenty feet across, the Map Room had concrete walls bare of any decoration.
Thomas was surprised at its simplicity.
Minho hit a switch and several rows of fluorescent lights flickered until they came on full strength, revealing the room in detail.
A distant, faded memory of sucking on pennies as a kid popped into his head.
The dark room had a musty, wet smell, laced with a deep coppery scent so strong he could taste it.
A cool fear, mixed with an intense curiosity, gripped him, and he had to remind himself to breathe.
Thomas went in without saying anything.
"After you," Minho said with a mocking bow.
With a lurching squeal, the heavy metal slab swung open.
Minho unlocked the door, cranked the wheel-handle, spinning it until an audible click sounded from inside, then pulled.
Smells of frying bacon wafted through the air—Frypan and his crew trying to keep up with dozens of starving stomachs.
Dawn had burst forth in all her glory, and Gladers milled about, readying for the day.
Thomas was itching to go inside.
A half hour later, fed and packed, they stood in front of the riveted metal door of the Map Room.
Even though he knew perfectly well what lived out there, he still didn’t want to think about why he needed weapons to go into the Maze.
His excitement waned a little.
He selected a short silvery dagger with a rubber grip, then one with a long black blade.
coThomas was pumped to hear that—he’d been curious about the squat building ever since he’d first seen a Runner go through its menacing door.
I wanna spend some time in the Map Room before we head iDocut.
Then we’ll go get breakfast and pack our lunch.
Make sure they’re nice and sharp.
""Still …""Quit your bellyachin’ and pick a couple.
"Only a few lucky toads have a set of these.
"What if Ben had gotten down here right before he went nuts and attacked me?"Minho pulled the keys out of his pocket and dangled them with a clickety-clank.
"Seems kind of dangerous to have all this stuff," he said.
Thomas just hoped the room was kept secret from most of the Gladers.
Knives of all shapes and sizes were stacked haphazardly all the way to the top.
"He nodded toward a large wooden trunk in the corner, its top open and leaning against the wall.
All we usually take with us is a couple of sharp knives.
"But ya never know.
"Don’t use most of it," Minho said.
At first he was terrified that they needed so many weapons, but he was relieved to see that the vast majority of it was covered with a thick layer of dust.
"Wow," Thomas murmured, his voice a dull thump in the enclosed place.
The sight of it immediately brought back the memory of Ben getting shot by Alby in the Deadheads.
One entire wall was dedicated to archery: wooden bows, arrows, spare strings.
Wooden poles, metal spikes, large pieces of mesh—like what covers a chicken coop—rolls of barbed wire, saws, knives, swords.
Shelves lined the walls, and there were several blocky wooden tables; everything in sight was covered with all manner of junk that gave him the creeps.
The room was larger than Thomas had expected, at least thirty square feet.
They hit a dirt floor, and Thomas couldn’t see a thing until Minho turned on a single lightbulb by pulling a string.
The cool air was refreshing, despite the dust and the strong scent of mildew.
The stairs creaked with every shift of weight as they descended the dozen or so steps.
"Minho went first.
"Keep ’em down in the basement so shanks like Gally can’t get to them.
Minho lifted it to reveal a set of wooden stairs leading into blackness.
Underneath lay a small trapdoor.
"Thomas followed Minho into the small room and watched as he pulled a few boxes away from the back wall.
"Come here, I’ll show ya.
" Minho stood and walked back to the closet.
"Weapons?""Weapons.
"Thomas had already stopped moving, felt an icy chill.
Good luck out there with no breakfast, no packed lunch, no weapons.
"You look like an idiot, prancin’ around like a shuck ballerina.
"Minho was still crouched over his backpack on the ground; he glanced up at Thomas with a look of disgust.
I guess I’m ready.
"They feel pretty good.
Shaking his head, he finished lacing up his shoes, then stood up and jogged around in circles, jumping up and down to test them out.
But it was already gone.
The thought surprised him, as if its source had been founded in actual memory, a wisp of light in the darkness of his mind.
"Thomas felt a trickle of doubt that life was so great back home—what kind of world allowed people to make kids live like this?
I guess those shuck-faces don’t want us seeing how wonderful life is when you don’t live in a freaking maze.
Asked for a TV, too, but no luck.
"Yeah, tried that one.
" "Ever asked for a map?"Minho laughed.
Sometimes we do, sometimes we don’t.
Doesn’t mean we always getwhat we want from the Creators.
Just drop a note in the Box, and there she goes.
"Of course we can.
Supplies you want?" Why would the people who’d sent them there help so much?
"You mean, you can make requests?
" He started stuffing things into his own backpack.
"You guys really have this all thought out, don’t you?""Couple of years runnin’ your butt off every day, you figure out what you need and ask for it.
" Thomas took the underwear and other stuff.
Your—""Yeah, got it.
""Nice and comfy?""Yeah, ya know.
Keeps you, um, nice and comfy.
"These bad boys’re what we call Runnie-undies.
Minho was holding out a couple of pairs of tightly cut underwear, made from a shiny white material.
" He nudged Thomas, who looked up.
"Here’s a backpack, water bottles, lunch pack, some shorts and T-shirts, other stuff.
Minho continued talking.
He buckled the watch onto his wrist and then returned to fitting on his shoes.
Though the sun and the shadows had seemed plenty to let him know roughly what time it was up to that point, being a Runner probably required more precision.
"Thomas was glad to have it.
Your life might depend on it.
"Put it on and never take it off.
It was black and very simple, its face showing only a digital display of the time.
Before Thomas could look up from tying his shoes, a plastic wristwatch dropped into his lap.
"Only Runners and Keepers get these," Minho said.
Minho grabbed a few more things before coming out to join him.
" Thomas took them and walked out of the closet to sit on the ground, eager to try them on.
""Those are fancy.
"But looks like I’ve got some—man, we could go canoeing in these things.
" Minho stood up holding a pair of sleek silver ones.
""Geez, shank, you got big feet.
"Eleven.
He reached down and pulled off a shoe he’d worn since coming to the Glade and took a look inside.
" It was so odd sometimes what he could and couldn’t remember.
"I … don’t know.
"What size you wear?""Size?" Thomas thought for a second.
" He bent over and rummaged through the pile.
If we had bad shoes, we’d have feet that look like freaking Mars.
They send new ones in the Box every so often.
"At least for us.
"That right there’s the number one supply we get," Minho announced.
Thomas almost laughed, it seemed so ordinary.
Eventually, it fell on an open box full of running shoes.
He caught glimpses of ropes and chains and other odds and ends as Minho’s flashlight crisscrossed the closet.
Thomas felt a shiver of anticipation, wondering what was inside.
Finally, in a crooked cranny near a back corner of the Homestead, Minho pulled out a key and opened up a shabby door leading to a small storage closet.
A cock crowed in the Blood House.
Thomas had never seen the place look so peaceful.
The slightest glow of early morning illuminated the Glade, turning everything dark blue and shadowed.
He crawled out from under his blanket and eagerly followed his teacher, winding his way through the crowd of Gladers who slept on the lawn, their snores the only sign they weren’t dead.
Thomas easily shook off his morning grogginess, excited to begin his training.
32coMinho woke Thomas before dawn, motioning with a flashlight to follow him back to the Homestead.
iDoc.
The word floated in his mind until he finally fell asleep.
Tomorrow.
He wouldn’t quit until he’d solved the puzzle and found a way home.
Forget it all.
Forget all the bad things.
Forget all the weird stuff.
Right then Thomas made a decision.
Tomorrow, he could start helping them find that missing something.
Tomorrow, his training would begin.
They had to be missing something.
Here, all paths led back to the Glade.
But not here.
It made sense.
In doing so, she was forced to turn right at every turn, and the simple laws of physics and geometry ensured that eventually she found the exit.
She escaped by never taking her right hand off the walls of the maze, sliding it along as she walked.
At dinner Minho had told him an old story—one of the bizarre and random things he remembered from before—about a woman trapped in a maze.
And despite that, despite the utter hopelessness of the situation, they still hadn’t given up.
And yet they’d never found an exit.
The Runners had to be in almost superhuman shape to do what they did every day.
The Maze stretched for miles and miles.
But he just couldn’t fathom how such a structure could have been built.
He believed it—he’d realized the massive scale when he’d been to the Cliff.
His thoughts drifted to what Minho had told him at dinner about the size and scale of the Maze.
He knew that, but had no explanation.
If it weren’t for the little fact they were torn apart from friends and families and trapped in a Maze with a bunch of monsters, it could be paradiDocse.
.
co Some things here were too perfect.
Never rained, never snowed, never got too hot or too cold.
The air felt perfect, and it made him wonder again about the weather of the place.
The mixed smells of the forest greeted him as he took his first deep breath, trying to relax.
He picked them up and settled in, snuggling up against the comforting corner where the stone walls met in a mass of soft ivy.
The blankets someone had left for him the night before still lay there.
Thomas didn’t complain—that was exactly what he needed.
Several boys milled about the Glade that night, but for the most part it was quiet, like everyone just wanted to go to sleep, end the day and be done with it.
He thought about his conversation with Chuck, wondered how it would feel to have parents say good night to you.
When they were finished, Thomas headed back to the secluded place where he’d slept the night before, in the corner behind the Deadheads.
Things for him to think about as he went to sleep that night.
Minho joined Thomas as he ate, prepping him a little before his first big day of Runner training, giving him a few stats and interesting facts.
The Cook seemed fully intent on backing up the support he’d shown for Thomas in the Gathering.
Frypan had known Thomas would be coming late, so he’d left a plate full of roast beef and potatoes; a note announced there were cookies in the cupboard.
Dinner was awesome.
He grinned at Alby, then headed straight for the kitchen and food.
Plus, he was starving.
" Despite wanting answers, Thomas was ready to get away from the Slammer.
""One was plenty.
"Go find some dinner—your terrible prison sentence of one day is over.
" Alby sighed, clearly done with the conversation.
""Okay, Greenie.
The girl’s the Greenie now.
"Quit calling me Greenie.
Alby’s change of mood broke Thomas out of his gloom.
" Again, the almost-smile.
"Don’t know what we’d do without your pep talks.
""Yeah, thanks, Greenie," Alby said sarcastically.
"We still have to escape this place.
" It had been worth a try.
"Doubt it.
"A drug … hallucinations …" Then he shook his head.
Alby thought for a minute.
" Thomas knew he was grasping at straws.
Maybe the Grief Serum is some kind of psycho drug that gives you hallucinations.
"Well, maybe they’re not real, Alby.
But he knew the choking was still too fresh in Alby’s mind for him to budge.
"Thomas was surprised to hear it was so bad—he wished Alby would give details, describe something, anything.
"If it was real, Greenie, I swear I’d go shack up with the Grievers before goin’ back.
And if God himself came down right now and told me I could go back home …" Alby looked to the ground and shook his head again.
""I remembered things from growin’ up, where I lived, that sort of stuff.
Your memories that came back.
"How bad was it?
"Thomas was so relieved that Alby thought he was okay, he only heard about half of what the older boy had just said.
For your sake and mine, I hope so.
Nah, just makes me think the GriefSerum and the Changing got somethin’ fishy about ’em.
"What you did—riskin’ your butt to save me and Minho—that ain’t no evil I’ve ever heard of.
" Alby showed the slightest hint of a smile, a bare crack in his usually hard face.
You might be a shuck-faced slinthead, but you ain’t evil.
"Greenie, you ain’t evil.
" Thomas half meant it.
" "Well, if I’m evil, maybe you should leave me locked up.
Might be something they got in our brains to control us—just like the memory wipe.
Ain’t gonna risk stranglin’ myself again.
"No way, shank.
"Can’t you tell me what you saw about me?"Alby shook his head.
Thomas was confused, but pressed on.
If the world’s the way I saw it …" He trailed off, leaving an ominous silence.
Some suspect it—I can only hope.
"I hope the Changing doesn’t give us real memories—just plants fake ones.
Alby continued.
He couldn’t form the words to ask what that meant.
Helping them?
"Thomas felt like someone had just rammed their fist in his abdomen.
But that ain’t what got me shook up.
Helping them.
"You were with the … Creators.
What was I doing?"Alby stared at an empty space in the distance for a while before answering.
"What was it about me—you kept saying you saw me.
Despite fearing an answer, he knew he had to ask the next question.
Alby thrashing, trying to strangle himself—Thomas wouldn’t have believed it had happened if he hadn’t seen it himself.
"The scene from the day before flashed in Thomas’s mind.
Now the images are gettin’ up and gone, like that same somethin’ don’t like me remembering.
Tried to talk about it, somethin’ starts choking me.
It was terrible.
It’s kinda fadin’, but I ain’t never gonna forget.
""I saw what I saw, Greenie.
"Uh … yeah, I remember.
He had no idea what to expect from Alby at that point.
"Thomas’s heart pounded.
"So, quite the little talk we had yesterday.
"Alby put the keys in his pocket and leaned back against the Slammer’s door.
I swear.
"But today you look brand-new.
" When Alby glared, Thomas hoped it was in jest and quickly clarified.
""Yeah, you looked it yesterday.
I feel like a piece of klunk twice crapped by a Griever.
"Actually, nothin’ but a lie.
Alby closed the Slammer door and locked it, then turned to face him.
" Thomas did, hoping his eyes weren’t flickering, making his concern obvious.
"Ain’t never been better—come on out.
You’re fine now?"Alby flexed his right bicep.
Just seems crazy you healed so quickly.
"Wha—Nothing.
His mind was racing, wondering what Alby remembered, what he knew, what he might say about him.
"Shuck it, boy, what you lookin’ at?"Thomas shook his head slightly, feeling like he’d been in a trance.
Alby noticed him goggling.
His skin was back to full color, his eyes no longer crisscrossed with red veins; he seemed to have gained fifteen pounds in twenty-four hours.
He looked so much better than the day before, Thomas couldn’t help staring at him.
"Ain’t dead, are ya, shank?" Alby asked.
The metal of key and lock jingled; then the door to the cell swung wide open.
" Just after Thomas heard the grind and rumble of stone against stone announce the closing of the Doors for the day, Alby showed up to release him, which was a huge surprise.
"I swear I’ll get you back home.
"I swear, Chuck," he whispered to no one.
Thomas stood up to pace around the little room, fuming with an intense desire to keep his promise.
He showed a thumbs-up sign in the window, then walked away.
"Hope you’re right," Chuck said with a shaky voice.
He felt it burn in his heart.
" AndThomas meant it.
Make your mom quit crying.
I’m a Runner now—I promise on my life I’ll get you back to that room of yours.
We’re gonna solve this thing, get out of here.
"Don’t give up, Chuck.
" Chuck didn’t say anything, but Thomas thought he heard the slightest of sniffles.
The real deal.
Puffy-eyed, snotty-nosed crying.
Hard.
And yeah, I bet she’s crying.
Sounds terrible, but I bet your mom is sitting in your room right now, holding your pillow, looking out at the world that stole you from her.
I know it.
"I’m sure you have parents.
" Thomas paused, calming down as much as he could, making sure his voice didn’t crack.
"Listen to me, Chuck.
Love had been ripped from their lives.
But happiness had been ripped from their lives.
He wanted Chuck to be happy.
He wanted them dead, tortured, even.
He hated them with a passion he didn’t know a human could feel.
Thomas hated the people who’d taken this poor, innocent kid from his family.
A mom who made him take a shower every day and a dad who helped him with homework.
He deserved to go home at night to a family who loved him, worried about him.
The boy should be in school, in a home, playing with neighborhood kids.
For the first time, he felt something for Chuck that made him so angry he wanted to kill somebody.
Only about what it all meant, who’d sent them there, how they’d ever get out.
It was strange, but he hadn’t even really thought of himself that way.
Life had been so crazy since he’d arrived, he’d never really thought of the Gladers as real people with real families, missing them.
Do you think they cry at night?"Thomas was completely shocked to realize his eyes had filled with tears.
So, I mean, you think it’s really possible I have a mom and a dad out in the world somewhere, missing me?
"Most of the guys who’ve gone through the Changing remember terrible things they won’t even talk about, which makes me doubt I have anything good back home.
It was low and bleak, almost a mumble.
"That’s not what I meant," Chuck said, his voice completely devoid of cheer.
You need me to explain the birds and bees?" Thomas’s heart hurt—he could remember getting that lecture but not who’d given it to him.
"Of course you do, shank.
Real parents?"Thomas laughed, mostly to push away the sudden surge of sadness the statement caused.
""Do you think I have parents?
"Still here.
"Hey, Thomas?" Chuck asked.
Thomas found himself hoping Chuck wouldn’t leave.
"A few minutes passed in silence.
Weird how that works.
""Kinda does make ya feel better, huh?
Sure made me feel better—don’t feel bad about crying.
"Everything crushed in on me at once.
" Thomas remembered all too well.
When the last one finally fell over the Cliff, I broke down and sobbed till my throat and chest hurt.
"Then?""Yeah.
"You cried?" he heard Chuck say through the window.
" Thomas might not have admitted it if Chuck hadn’t opened up.
I’m probably just a shallow shuck-face.
""I’ve only cried once since showing up, but that was after almost getting eaten alive.
This became home, even though we spend every day hoping to get out.
Then I just got used to it, I guess.
Almost till the day you got here.
"Yeah?""Like a pants-wettin’ baby.
"This made thoughts of Alby leave Thomas’s mind.
Every night.
"I used tocry.
Chuck was too short for his eyes to reach where Thomas could see them as he spoke, but from his next statement, Thomas imagined them filling with a bleak sadness, maybe even tears.
"I know what you mean," he murmured.
He’d never heard Chuck say something so deep and so true.
"Thomas was a little surprised.
I wanna remember.
Whatever’s there, whatever I was taken from.
I want to go back to my family.
All I know is I don’t want to be here.
It’s weird to feel sad and homesick, but have no idea what it is you wish you could go back to, ya know?
"Thomas, I’m kinda messed up, man.
Chuck continued talking, taking a completely unexpected turn.
But that didn’t mean Alby would keep it between them now that he was up and walking around.
Then he remembered that no one else knew what Alby had said after Newt left the room—before the seizure.
He pictured the older boy thrashing around, choking himself the day before.
"The mention of Alby pulled Thomas’s attention from his food.
Seems fine—and Newt’s glad he doesn’t have to be the big boss anymore.
And, oh, yeah—Alby’s up and around.
Still no sign of Gally—Newt told the Runners to come back lickety-splickety if they found his body.
"The Runners are out in the Maze, everyone’s working—maybe we’ll survive after all.
"Everything’s getting back to normal," the boy announced.
After passing some pieces of chicken and a glass of water through the window, he took up his usual role of talking Thomas’s ear off.
Thankfully, Chuck arrived with lunch at noon, relieving Thomas from his thoughts.
He sat and tried to bring back memories, but every effort evaporated into oblivious mist before anything formed.
Two hours after that he started to think having dinner with Gally and the Grievers would beat sitting inside that stupid Slammer.
By hour number two, he wanted to bang his head against the wall.
The first hour passed, and Thomas felt boredom creep in like rats under the door.
"And then he was gone.
Think about that while ya sit here and stare at the bloody walls.
But friends or no, gotta run things properly, keep us buggers alive.
"You’re not half bad, shank.
"Newt smiled.
Order.
You saved some lives, Tommy, but ya still need to learn—""Yeah, I know.
"Nice reward for breakin’ the rules.
Newt’s head appeared at the little glassless window, looking through the bars, a smirk on his face.
Thomas turned back to his new home and heard the latch close and the lock click behind him.
"Have fun," Newt said before closing the door.
Didn’t even have a cushion.
"Thomas groaned inwardly as he stepped inside and saw the one piece of furniture—an ugly, rickety chair with one leg obviously shorter than the rest, probably on purpose.
Enjoy yourself.
"There’s only a chair in there and nothin’ at all for ya to do.
Newt took out a key and opened it up, then motioned for Thomas to enter.
It was a big block of roughly cut concrete, with one tiny, barred window and a wooden door that was locked with a menacing rusty metal latch, like something out of the Dark Ages.
The Slammer stood in an obscure place between the Homestead and the north Glade wall, hidden behind thorny, ragged bushes that looked like they hadn’t been trimmed in ages.
Though something told him there was a better chance of Gally bringing him flowers than of passing a day in the Glade with nothing strange happening.
A day to just sit and relax.
Suddenly a day in prison sounded excellent.
"Thomas nodded and headed out the door, Newt leading the way.
Chucky’ll bring ya some lunch at noon.
"You can take it easy while you’re hangin’ in the Slammer.
"Come on, ya buggin’ jailbird," Newt said.
That grin sent a wave of reassurance through Thomas, as if he were finding out the world was okay again.
Thomas turned to see Newt there, smiling.
""Then your bloody wish is granted," said a voice from the kitchen door behind him.
"All I want is one normal day—one day to relax.
"Thomas picked up his plate and took it to the counter.
I don’t care.
If not, he’ll get hungry and show up to eat.
"If he’s dead, you guys’ll probably find him eventually.
" Chuck shrugged as if they were arguing over what to have for breakfast.
""Well, whatever.
"Hated me.
" A pause.
The guy hates me.
Wanted to prove he could do anything I can do.
"Maybe that’s exactly why he stayed out there.
Like you.
Gally was an idiot, but he couldn’t possibly be stupid enough to stay out in the Maze all night.
I think his buddies are hiding him inside the Glade somewhere.
Aren’t Minho and I the only ones who’ve survived a night out there?""That’s what I’m saying.
Then where is he?
""Huh?
"I don’t think he’s dead.
"A contemplative look came over Chuck.
You’re talking about him like he went on vacation.
"Ya know, the guy is probably dead.
"Thomas couldn’t believe how casually Chuck spoke about it.
They’re the ones accusing you of stuff.
No one liked him except for his few shuck cronies.
"Don’t worry about it, dude.
""I can’t believe …" Thomas stared at his plate, trying to understand why Gally would do that.
Everyone knows he went nuts—some shank even accused you of killing him when you ran out there yesterday.
He went into the Maze?""Yeah.
You’re serious?
Either way, the news stunned him.
"Thomas dropped his fork, not knowing what he’d expected or hoped for.
Hasn’t been seen since.
theco Gathering.
I was gonna tell you—someone said they saw him run out into the Maze after heiDocleft.
"Did they ever find Gally?" "No.
"Hey, Chuck," he asked after taking a bite of eggs, trying to sound casual.
Then he remembered Gally.
Other than a sprinkling of dirty looks here and there, most people seemed to be on his side.
Every Glader going in and out the door gave Thomas a stare; a few came up and offered congratulations.
They made it to the kitchen and grabbed a quick breakfast, taking two empty seats at the big table inside.
He pushed the thought away before it consumed him.
The world seemed to darken for a moment—he couldn’t even remember his own mother.
" My mom, he thought.
"If only you were my mom," Thomas murmured, "life’d be a peach.
"Thomas smiled at his friend’s enthusiasm.
Anyway, as long as you know old Chucky is proud of you.
"We’ll see how you feel after running your guts out.
" Thomas forced a grin, though he cringed at the thought of hanging out in the Slammer by himself all day before he got to start.
"I guess I’m a little excited.
What he couldn’t stop thinking about was Teresa, the voice in his head, what she’d said.
"Being a Runner was the last thing on Thomas’s mind.
Quit being modest.
""Yeah, right.
It’s not my fault Minho and Newt want me to be a Runner.
"I just did what anyone else would’ve done.
Well, you proved me wrong, huh?"But Thomas didn’t feel like talking about it.
I kept telling myself, this sucker’s in for a rude awakening.
"That first night, when you were bragging about being a Runner and all that klunk—shuck it, I was laughing inside so hard.
" Chuck paused to take a breath, then kept going.
As for me, I think it’s pretty awesome.
Some shanks grumbled, some cheered, most acted like they couldn’t care less.
And he told us what the Council decided about you—one day in the cell, then you’ll enter the Runner training program.
"Newt found you last night and told everyone to let you sleep.
Thomas wasn’t complaining—it was the closest thing to normal in his life.
They headed for the Homestead, Chuck yapping the whole time.
""Good that," Chuck said, slapping Thomas on the back.
Let’s eat, I’m starving.
"Just thinking.
"Sorry," Thomas said as he stood up, acting as normal as he could.
Chuck was looking at him with eyebrows raised.
Surely he wasn’t.
I’m not crazy, Thomas told himself.
Thomas would have to convince him somehow that stress had finally overwhelmed him and a good night’s rest had solved everything.
The only problem was Newt.
Things were bad enough—no way he’d make it worse by telling people about voices in his head.
And he would keep it that way.
Well, no one except Newt.
They didn’t even know that she had told him her name.
No one else knew the weird things Teresa had said, or accused him of.
Either way, only he had heard the voice inside his head.
Maybe the stress of the Maze had driven him insane.
What did that mean?Then it hit him that maybe he was crazy.
To us.
Something about me and her doing this to them.
Those things she said.
he thought.
What are they going to do to me?
"The events of the previous day came crashing into Thomas’s mind, and his stomach seemed to twist inside out.
cot start acting normal or things’ll just get worse.
YouiDocneed.
"Come on, get up.
" Chuck tugged on his arm.
"You’re almost too late for breakfast.
"What time is it?" he asked.
A couple of blankets had been placed over him during the night—someone playing the Glade Mother.
Groaning, Thomas leaned forward, stretched out his back and arms.
" It was Chuck—the kid seemed to be able to find him anywhere.
"Thomas, wake up.
The next morning, someone gently shook him awake.
Minutes later, his back once again comfortably pressed against thick layers of ivy, he fell asleep.
The south wall eventually moved, closing for the night; he leaned forward until it stopped.
No one came, no one bothered him.
When he could hear only the sounds of distant Glader conversations, as well as faint echoes of bleating sheep and snorting pigs, his wish was granted; he found the junction of the two giant walls and collapsed into the corner to rest.
More than anything, he wanted to be alone.
Exhausted, he headed straight for the Deadheads, went deep into the forest until he reached the spot where the trees crowded against the southwest corner.
By the time he’d crossed the threshold into the Glade, the Doors were only minutes away from closing for the night.
On he ran, left and right, straight, on and on.
He’d doubted it until now, wondered how the Runners could be so inept.
With its walls that moved, every night, he finally understood why the Maze was so hard to solve.
Miles and miles and miles.
Never before had the sheer size of the Maze truly hit him.
It didn’t take a math genius to calculate that his speed and time combined meant he’d run roughly half a marathon by the time he returned to the Glade.
He’d recovered quickly, and ran now with almost no effort, despite nearing the end of his second hour of running.
Just a day earlier he’d been at the end of his strength and sore from top to bottom.
The second thing he learned about himself, as if the night in the Maze hadn’t proved it already, was that his body was in perfect shape.
Soon, Thomas would be the best Runner.
Minho had been right.
He knew what it meant.
Not once did he falter on his return, turning left and right and running down long corridors in reverse of the way he had come.
Without meaning to or realizing it, he’d pictured in his mind his exact route through the Maze as he escaped the voice.
As he ran toward the Glade, he learned a lot about himself.
And as bad—as weird—as the invasion of his mind had been, it beat another date with the Grievers any day.
Denying the truth would solve nothing.
He had no choice.
The strange things she’d said.
The voice in his head.
But he didn’t know if he could face her again.
He had to get back.
That his instincts were strong.
It only peripherally hit him then that without thinking he’d recognized the direction and the time.
It shocked him when he realized he’d been running for almost an hour—the shadows of the walls ran long toward the east, and soon the sun would set for the night and the Doors would close.
29coThomas didn’t stop until the voice had gone for good.
We did this to them.
It was you and me, Tom.
But he still couldn’t escape the voice.
Kept going, through corridor after corridor, deep into the heart of the Maze, rules or no rules.
He made it to the East Door and sprinted through it, out of the Glade.
He wanted to scream, run until he could run no more.
Everything is going to change, she said.
But it did nothing to shut her up.
Down the stairs, out the front door, he ran.
Ignoring Newt’s questions, he stumbled to the door and yanked it open, stepped into the hall, ran.
Thomas couldn’t take it anymore.
They sent me as a trigger.
It has to end.
We can pass the Trials.
I won’t remember much when I wake up.
My memory’s fading already, Tom.
It was too strange; he couldn’t bring his rational mind to accept what was happening.
He put his hands up to his ears, squeezed his eyes shut.
Tom, don’t freak out on me.
They were literally, in every way, inside his mind.
Yet they didn’t sound like they were coming from the room, from outside his body.
The words echoed in his mind, touched his eardrums—he could hear them.
It has to.
It’ll end soon.
" Tom, we’re the last ones.
It’s … not really a voice … but it is.
What are you bloody talking about?" "Newt, I’m serious.
""Tommy, sit your butt down.
"I’m … hearing her voice in my head—or something … it’s not really a voice….
She just said my name!""What?""I swear!" The world spun around him, pressed in, crushing his mind.
In my head.
"She’s … she’s freakin’ talking to me.
Acid boiled in his stomach.
He felt the thumps in his skull.
Thomas’s heart was racing.
"What’s bloody wrong with you?" Newt asked.
He knew he’d heard it.
He’d heard it.
Whispery, sweet, confident.
A voice.
This time he jumped from the chair and scrambled as far from the bed as possible, knocking over the lamp on the table; it landed with the crash of broken glass.
I can’t explain it.
But in my mind, man.
"It was … I swear I heard it.
"Thomas felt … odd—an uncomfortable feeling, like something supernatural had just occurred.
Has to be.
That’s her name, Tommy.
Must’ve sprung loose from your bloody memory blocks!
No, I didn’t hear that.
""Teresa?
"I … I swear I heard a name.
What did you hear?"Thomas was scared to admit it.
Why?
Did … she say anything?"  "Her?" Newt asked, his eyes lit up.
Maybe it was in my head.
I just thought I heard something … I don’t know.
"Of course not.
"Newt, did you just say something before I stood up?""No.
"I …" He sat back down, leaned forward, staring at the girl’s face.
"Did ya remember somethin’?"Thomas ignored him, looked around the room in confusion, knowing he’d heard a voice, then back at the girl.
He had heard…"What’s wrong?" Newt asked.
Thomas jolted up from the chair, knocked it backward, spun in a circle, searching.
"I just don’t—"Teresa.
He leaned forward in his chair and took a deep breath, then looked at Newt, shaking his head in surrender.
The irony of the question struck him—he didn’t even know who he was.
Who was she?
" Thomas closed his eyes, searched the darkness of his thoughts, seeking her face in that emptiness.
""I’m trying, so shut up.
Concentrate.
"Well, keep bloody thinking—don’t lose it.
" Thomas rubbed his eyes, frustrated that he couldn’t solidify the link.
But something clicked—I know her from somewhere.
Who is she?""No idea.
Newt stood up.
It felt good to finally admit it out loud.
"I do know her," he whispered, leaning back in his chair.
But he had felt something.
It lasted only an instant before vanishing into the abyss of his other captured memories.
Stronger recognition briefly tickled the back of his mind—a flutter of wings in a dark corner, unseen but there all the same.
As he stared at her, he realized once more how truly beautiful she was.
Her black hair, her perfect white skin, her full lips….
He tried to picture those eyes on her now as he looked at her slumbering face, melding the two images in his mind.
They’d been blue, richer in color than the eyes of any other person he could remember seeing before.
He thought back to those brief moments when she’d opened her eyes right after being pulled out of the Box.
"Anything at all?"Thomas didn’t respond, kept looking, willing his mind to break down the memory barrier and seek out this girl from his past.
"Anything ring a bell?" Newt asked.
Thomas, relieved that Newt still hadn’t erupted into accusations, grabbed the one from the desk and placed it right next to where the girl’s head lay; he sat down, leaning forward to look at her face.
"Pull up a chair," Newt said as he sat on the edge of the bed.
" The Med-jack nodded at both of them and left the room.
"Get us a report of all that, okay?""Will do.
"Thanks, Clint," Newt said in what sounded to Thomas like an obvious dismissal.
It was like a maddening itch inside his skull that wouldn’t go away.
How did he know this girl?
Would the references to him never end?
"Thomas almost fell down at this.
cohis name over and over.
"She keeps iDocsayng.
"Well … I can’t make it all out, but …" Clint looked at Thomas again.
"It’s okay—he can hear whatever I hear," Newt assured him.
’ And, uh …" Clint looked at Thomas as if he didn’t want to continue in his company.
Other stuff about the Creators and how ‘it all has to end.
""Well, the same thing she said when we pulled her out of the Box, about things changing.
"Give me an example.
" Newt pointed at a notepad on the nightstand.
But yeah, when we can.
"Most of it’s impossible to understand.
Clint nodded.
"Have you been writin’ down every word she says?" Newt asked.
He had no idea why that suddenly made him so nervous.
That she might talk to people.
For some reason, he’d never really considered the possibility that the girl might wake up and be okay.
"Thomas felt his hackles rise.
We think she’ll come out of it soon.
"She’s doing fine, though she talks in her sleep all the time.
"She surviving?""Yeah," Clint answered.
"Hey, Clint," Newt said, sounding comfortable, like he’d stopped by to visit many times before.
They were doing everything possible to keep her alive and healthy.
A plate and bowl on the bedside table had the remains of her lunch—mashed potatoes and soup.
One of the Med- jacks was there, the shorter one—Thomas couldn’t remember his name— dropping water into the comatose girl’s mouth a few drips at a time.
But her chest rose and fell with even breaths; her skin was full of color.
Thomas had almost expected the skeletal remnant of a person—someone on the verge of death.
The girl seemed to be sleeping peacefully, like she’d wake up at any minute.
"Thomas barked a sarcastic laugh at the idea, but Newt wasn’t smiling.
We need your memories.
"If all else fails," Newt said, interrupting Thomas’s thoughts, "we’ll send ya to the Grievers—get ya stung so you can go through the Changing.
If Newt turned on him now, Thomas didn’t know if he could handle it.
He’d opened himself up, and he really liked Newt.
Thomas couldn’t stifle his worry about what Newt was thinking.
The boys walked back toward the Homestead, where the girl still lay in a coma.
It looked like he wasn’t done keeping secrets after all.
" He didn’t know if he could bring himself to tell the complete truth about Alby’s accusations, not to mention how he felt about the girl.
"Okay.
"Thomas sighed, then got to his feet.
"Then I want you to tell me every single word Alby said to you.
" Newt gathered his lunch trash and stood up.
I want you to look at her till your eyes bleed, see if somethin’ gets triggered in that shuck brain of yours.
"The girl.
Dread filled him again.
" "Who?" Thomas asked, but knew the answer as soon as he spoke.
"To begin, we better go see someone.
"Good that," Newt said, looking almost too agreeable.
" Thomas couldn’t help worrying that he’d thrown up some red flags for Newt, and that the older boy was just hiding his concern.
Got it?""Yeah, got it.
Tell me anything that seems even remotely familiar.
Free time, meals, goin’ to sleep at night, as you walk around, train, work.
"I just meant do it from now on.
" Newt laughed.
"Not now, you dumb shuck.
" Thomas closed his eyes, started searching the darkness of his mind.
co "I will.
Try, for all our sakesiDoc.
Delve inside that brain of yours, and seek it out.
Strain your mind, spend your free time wanderin’ your thoughts, and think about this place.
"Well, keep lookin’ for it.
" Newt examined him for a second, not hiding his obvious suspicion.
""That’s bloody interesting.
"It all seemed familiar to me, and I knew I wanted to be a Runner.
Was something wrong with him?
Was he different from everyone else somehow?
What did it all mean?
" Thomas paused, upset and suddenly embarrassed.
""Yeah, well.
Most of us spent a week klunkin’ our pants and bawlin’ our eyes out.
"Uh, no, Tommy.
He simply rolled his eyes.
"Anyone else go through that?"But Newt’s face was blank.
" He looked at Newt, hoping to see some sort of recognition in his eyes.
"But I did feel like I’d been here before when I first got here.
" He spoke slowly, carefully.
"Well … I can’t put my finger on anything specific.
But he was tired of keeping secrets.
"Thomas hesitated, scared of the consequences of what he was about to say.
"Talk.
"I can see your wheels spinnin’," Newt said, quietly.
A far cry from the terror he should’ve experienced.
How comfortable and at home he’d felt.
So much had happened since arriving, he’d almost forgotten how familiar the Glade had felt to him that first night, sleeping next to Chuck.
""Nothing—" Thomas started, but stopped.
Be honest if anything—anything at all—seems familiar.
""I need you to open your mind.
Obviously.
I want to know who I am just as much as anyone else.
"Fine, so how do we do it?
"Thomas was overwhelmed by a surge of anger.
The point is there’s something different about you, and it’s time we figured it out.
None of us remember anything, and we’re bloody sick of you reminding us.
Quit sayin’ that—don’t ever say it again.
"I know you don’t remember anything, Thomas!
""Newt, I don’t know—" Thomas started, but Newt didn’t let him finish.
According to Gally, there’s somethin’ rotten enough about ya that he wants to kill ya.
And Gally, Alby and Ben claim they saw you in their memories after the Changing—and from what I gather, you weren’t plantin’ flowers and helpin’ old ladies cross the street.
"That’s right.
"Newt looked away for a moment, then turned back.
"They all said things were going to change.
But Thomas already knew.
"He paused, perhaps expecting Thomas to ask what he meant.
Ben said it," Newt continued, "the girl, after we took her out of the Box—she said it.
Alby said it.
"Gally said it.
He dreaded the words.
"Thomas knew what was coming, but was startled.
We’ve heard it too many times now to deny it, and it’s time to discuss it.
"Thomas," he began, "I need you to accept something.
Crumpling his trash into a ball, he turned and looked straight at Thomas.
The boys sat in silence, finishing their lunches, until Newt finally got to what he really wanted to talk about.
Avoiding other people was his new goal in life.
Deeper down, he hoped to get out of the Glade as much as possible.
He resolved to do just as Newt said, hoping it would keep his mind off things.
"Thomas was shocked that the idea of entering the Maze again didn’t frighten him all that much.
I expect you to work your butt off.
Lots to learn.
The Maze, the Maps, everything.
Minho’ll teach ya.
So Minho’s going to train me?""That’s right—you’re a Runner now.
co beautiful.
"Sunds.
Being mostly alone sounded like a great ideaiDoc.
Got it?" Thomas was more than happy to oblige.
Then you’re Minho’s, and I want you to stay away from the other shanks for a while.
Tomorrow, the Slammer.
"You’re with me the rest of today—we need to figure things.
"Here’s how it’ll play out, Tommy," Newt said.
I’m not scared of that guy anymore.
I don’t care, he thought.
" Thomas’s only concern was that Gally would just hate him all the more for being thrown in jail.
Remember what I told you about order.
That shuck-face is gonna pay a heavy price for acting like that—he’s lucky we don’t Banish him.
"That shank threatened to kill you and we have to make bloody sure it never happens again.
He’d be happy to slam the door closed and throw away the key himself.
""Serious?" Thomas couldn’t help feeling a shot of pure elation at the thought.
Soon as we’re done eating, I need to find him and throw his butt in jail.
"Bugger’s gone off and hid somewhere.
"We have to find Gally," Newt said through a bite of carrot, changing the subject.
It was a terrifying thought.
Could the people behind the Maze control them somehow?
"Thomas paused in the middle of chewing.
Alby tried to—must be why he went nuts for a while.
They always refuse.
But then again, no one’s ever tried to tell us what they remembered during the Changing.
"What Alby just did?
Newt looked at him, his face suddenly somber.
"Ever seen that happen before?" Thomas asked after a minute or so.
Thomas forced himself to eat; the way things were going, he needed to make sure he’d have strength to deal with whatever insane thing came his way next.
The boys decided to take their lunches to eat outside, and a few minutes later they found themselves at the west wall, looking out at the many work activities going on throughout the Glade, their backs up against a spot of thick ivy.
He felt like he’d lived an entire lifetime since awakening from his memory wipe, but he’d only been there a week.
For some reason, he was different from everyone else in the Glade.
Something told him this sort of treatment would now be the norm.
Thomas couldn’t ignore the way the Keeper of the cooks kept giving him a weird look, eyes darting away whenever Thomas returned the stare.
They made their way directly to the kitchen, where, despite Frypan’s grumbling, they were able to get cheese sandwiches and raw vegetables.
And he was growing to expect it.
" No matter what he did, he was becoming more and more entwined in the dealings of the Glade.
""Somehow I knew you were going to say something like that.
Let’s go look for some leftovers from lunch.
"Well, I am, ya shank.
"Newt only grinned.
I feel like puking after what I just saw—no, I’m not hungry.
"Hungry?
Thomas couldn’t believe the question.
"Hungry, Tommy?" Newt asked when they were outside.
For Thomas, things just seemed to be getting worse and worse.
Neither boy said a word for a while.
Thomas followed Newt as he hurried down the stairs and out of the Homestead into the bright light of midafternoon.
He and Newt left the room and softly closed the door.
Not good at all.
Thomas didn’t think that sounded very good.
" Alby rolled over, his back telling them he’d finally finished speaking.
"Yeah?""Protect the Maps.
"And Newt?" Alby called again from the bed, not bothering to open his eyes.
"Let’s go," Newt whispered.
He had no idea what was going on.
Newt gave Thomas a questioning look, but Thomas could only return it with a shrug.
Somehow things always led back to the girl.
There it was again—the girl.
" Then his eyes slid shut.
"Be careful with the girl.
Alby opened his eyes for a brief moment, then repeated what he’d said, a little more loudly.
Both boys stopped in their tracks.
Then, just as they stepped through the doorway, Alby mumbled something from his bed.
Thomas had no problem leaving that crazy house—he followed Newt out and into the hall.
Newt caught Thomas’s gaze and gestured for the door.
"But Alby was already drifting off, nodding slightly as his eyes closed.
" He patted him on the head, then added, "You’re messed up, shank.
"Get your butt to sleep and we’ll talk about it later.
He grabbed the blankets that had fallen off the bed in Alby’s struggle and pulled them atop the sick boy.
At least at the moment.
But Newt seemed to think it wasn’t worth trying to figure out.
" Alby looked just as confused as Thomas felt.
It … it wasn’t me.
"I don’t know….
"What do you mean it wasn’t you?" he asked.
Newt threw his hands up.
" "Wasn’t me, I swear," Alby murmured.
"You were trying to bloody kill yourself.
"Sorries, nothin’," Newt replied.
He hoped.
"Thomas took a deep breath, sure he’d never experience something so disturbing and uncomfortable again.
I’m sorry….
It was like … something was controlling my body.
"Don’t know what happened.
"I’m sorry, Newt," he whispered.
Alby looked up, eyes droopy, as if he was on the edge of slipping into a deep sleep.
Thomas took that as his cue to do the same, hoping the ordeal had truly ended.
Then another minute before he pulled his knee back and stood up.
Newt waited a full minute before he slowly let go of Alby’s hands.
Thomas held firm to Alby’s legs, afraid to move and set the boy off again.
Then, slowly, he calmed, and a few seconds later he lay still, his breath evening; his eyes glazed over.
Alby’s whole body jerked a couple of times, his midsection thrusting up and away from the bed.
He pushed them tightly against the struggling boy’s chest.
"You’re bloody killin’ yourself !"Thomas could see the muscles in Newt’s arms flexing, veins popping out as he pulled at Alby’s hands, until finally, inch by inch, he was able to pry them away.
"Let go!" Newt yelled as he tugged.
He wrapped his arms around the boy’s thighs and squeezed while Newt put a knee on one of Alby’s shoulders, then grabbed at Alby’s hands, still clasped around his own neck in a chokehold.
Thomas steeled himself, then jumped on top of Alby’s body, grabbing both legs and pinning them to the bed.
"Just bloody do it!" Newt yelled.
He stumbled backward again, rubbing the sore spot.
His foot hit Thomas in the jaw; a lance of pain shot through his whole skull.
"Grab his legs!"Thomas moved forward, but Alby’s legs kicked and flailed out, making it impossible to get any closer.
Newt ran to Alby and grabbed him by the shoulders, pushing with his whole body to pin the convulsing boy to the bed.
"Newt, get in here!"The door was flung open before he’d finished his last sentence.
"Newt!" he screamed, cupping his hands around his mouth.
"Alby!" Thomas yelled, not daring to reach down and grab him.
The dark skin of his face, which had been oddly pale just a minute earlier, had turned purple, his eyes rolled up so far in their sockets they looked like glowing white marbles.
coa seizure, his legs kicking in every direction.
Thomas stood up quickly, stumbled backward, horrified—Alby struggled as if he wasiDochavng.
His tongue stuck out of his mouth; he bit it over and over.
His legs kicked out and he rolled onto his side, thrashing back and forth as if someone else were trying to strangle him.
""You—" Alby started, then suddenly grabbed his own throat, making gurgly choking sounds.
You’re not making sense.
What came back?
"The Changing," he pressed, "what happened?
Why can’t we just live here and be happy?""Alby …" Thomas wished he could take a peek in the boy’s mind, see what he’d seen.
Why would those shucks want us to remember?
"It’s horrible, ya know.
His eyes were deep pockets of sorrow, sunken, dark.
""It ain’t pretty," Alby answered, and for the first time since Newt had left, Alby looked up, straight at Thomas.
I’d love to know who I am.
What did you see?
"I don’t know what you’re talking about.
Thomas forced himself to talk.
"The Flare?
I remember the Flare.
Who the girl is.
Where we came from, who you are.
Seen everything.
"Seen it.
"I know who you are," Alby repeated slowly.
He was utterly confused.
He tried; nothing came out but an incoherent mumble.
Thomas couldn’t find words to reply.
"I know who you are," Alby said finally, breaking the silence.
A long pause stretched into several minutes, and Thomas’s hands shook with fear.
He hoped Alby would say what he wanted and be done with it.
Thomas’s heart rate quickened—he was now alone with a guy who’d had a bad temper before getting attacked by a Griever and going through the Changing.
Newt obeyed, slamming it shut.
"Close the door!" Alby shouted, one final insult.
"Don’t expect me to kiss your butt when you come sayin’ sorry," he said, then stepped into the hallway.
Thomas thought.
He’s really going to leave?
Then, after a long, tense moment, Newt stood from his chair and walked over to the door, opened it.
"Get out!"Newt’s face sank in obvious hurt—Thomas was surprised to see no anger there.
He scooted himself back to lean against the headboard again.
"Out!" Alby sat up as he yelled, his voice cracking with the strain of it.
"But—" Newt protested.
" Thomas felt incredibly awkward, worried about what Newt was thinking and dreading what Alby wanted to say to him.
"Leave.
""Newt.
"No way—I wanna hear.
" "Leave," Alby said, his eyes closed, his breathing heavy.
"He’s right here—talk to him.
What did Alby want him for?"Fine, ya grouchy shuck," Newt said.
Thomas shrugged, feeling sicker by the second.
I asked for freaking Thomas!"Newt looked up, questioned Thomas with a raising of his eyebrows.
Thomas!
"I didn’t ask for you, Newt!
"I wanted Thomas!" Alby yelled, with a sudden burst of energy that Thomas would’ve thought impossible a few seconds earlier.
""What do you mean, you saw—" Newt began.
"Don’t feel so good.
coclosed, then open again; he sank back to a flat position on the bed, stared at the ceiling.
The girl … Thomas … I saw them …" His eyelidsiDocflckered.
"Everything’s … gonna change….
You still sick?"Alby’s next words came out in a wheeze, as if every one of them would take a week off his life.
"What’s wrong?
" Newt leaned forward.
"Chuck said you were thrashin’ around, acting like a loonie.
"Yeah," he muttered, a scratchy croak.
With a groan he shifted in the bed and sat up, his back against the headboard.
He looked at Newt, then across at Thomas.
"Alby’s eyes fluttered open—bloodshot orbs that glistened in the light.
Chuck said you wanted to talk to Tommy.
Then more loudly: "Alby.
"Alby," Newt whispered.
Thomas took a seat on the other side.
He walked over and sat in a wooden chair next to the bed.
"Is he asleep?" Thomas whispered, trying to avoid the real question that had popped in his mind:He’s not dead, is he?"I don’t know," Newt said quietly.
But when his eyes lifted, all he saw was a very weak-looking teenage boy lying in his bed, eyes closed.
As he entered, he prepared himself for the horror that might await.
Newt had stepped into the room and was motioning for Thomas to follow.
It was impossible to explain how that felt, even to himself.
He could remember theaters, but not what any specific one looked like.
He could remember movies, but not the actors’ faces or with whom he’d watched them.
There it was again—the smallest glimpse at his past.
Newt pushed open the door, the slight creak once again reminding Thomas of some vague childhood memory of haunted-house movies.
He followed Newt to the second door on the right and watched as the older boy knocked lightly; a moan sounded in reply.
But he expected the worst, and braced himself.
The memory made him queasy; he hoped Alby was completely healed from the ordeal so he didn’t have to witness something like that again—the sickly skin, the veins, the thrashing.
They stood at the opposite end of the long, dark hallway from the usual staircase, the one Thomas had climbed on his very first day to see Ben.
Newt, all grim and solemn, was waiting for Thomas at the top of the stairwell.
He did not want to go up there.
Sweat slicked his palms, and he felt a drop trickle down his temple.
With a shrug Thomas began climbing the stairs.
Or worse?"Yeah, right," Chuck whispered, staring at the wooden steps in a daze.
What if he made accusations like Ben had?
" He was trying to make a joke, trying to deny that he was terrified to see Alby.
"They just elected me a Runner, so you’re buddies with a stud now.
"Lighten up," Thomas said to Chuck as Newt headed up the staircase.
Thomas figured that something about Alby’s behavior had the kid’s nerves on edge.
"For once, Chuck simply nodded and said nothing.
Stay.
"You.
Newt took the first step, then gave Chuck a cold glare.
"Thomas followed him, with Chuck right behind, as they left the Council room and went down the hall toward a narrow, spiraling staircase that he hadn’t noticed before.
"No way I’m not going with ya.
"Well, come on," Newt said to Thomas as he grabbed his arm.
" For the second time that day, Thomas was shocked into silence.
"He keeps asking for him.
" "What do you mean?"Chuck pointed at Thomas.
"Um … he doesn’t want you.
" Newt made for the door, but Chuck held up his hand.
" "Why?""I guess Alby’s thrashing around and acting all crazy, telling them he needs to talk to somebody.
"Med-jacks sent me.
Chuck was wringing his hands.
The tone of his voice only heightened Thomas’s concern.
"What’s wrong?" Newt asked, standing up.
Thomas felt the grin fade from his face.
Chuck stood there, looking like he’d just been chased by a Griever.
A knock on the opened door grabbed his attention—he turned to see who it was.
"Thomas couldn’t help smiling at the Keeper’s clever ways.
Thank me later.
Aim high, hit low.
"Worked, didn’t it?
"Minho faked an evil grin.
You’re nuttier than Gally by a long shot.
You want me to be Keeper?
"Keeper?
"Thomas punched him back.
"It’s all this shank’s fault.
Minho walked over and playfully punched Thomas in the arm.
"Well, that was good times," he murmured.
Newt hadn’t moved from his chair, where he sat jotting notes.
The meeting was dismissed and everyone except Newt and Minho left the room in a hurry.
That won’t be so bad.
" One day, Thomas thought.
"The wake-up till sunset.
"What about my punishment?""Tomorrow," Newt answered.
Maybe he’d had his one and only turn of bad luck.
Despite everything, he felt a shiver of excitement; he was sure they could avoid getting trapped out there at night again.
He was going to be a Runner, explore the Maze.
"It hadn’t really hit Thomas until then.
Minho has a lot of training to give you.
Quit your cryin’ and get out of here.
"We just elected you as a buggin’ Runner.
""Look, Tommy," Newt said.
"I love how you guys are just talking about me like I’m not here.
Thomas groaned at how invisible he’d become.
Good that?"Winston nodded.
"Everyone put some thought into it—maybe when we get right nice and bored we can have another Gathering to talk about it.
""Fair enough," Newt said.
And it’s true that ever since Thomas got here, everything’s been shucked and screwy.
Something about it—I don’t think he just made it up.
"It’s fine with me, but we shouldn’t totally ignore what Gally said.
"Winston gazed at Thomas carefully, then back to Newt.
"We don’t need your vote, but tell us what’s bonkin’ around your brain.
Newt looked at him.
Winston was the only one to say no.
Everyone else chimed in their approval, filling Thomas with relief and a sense of pride.
" "Me too," Minho said.
I vote for yours.
"Just vote.
"Okay, we had several recommendations, so let’s give it a go-round—""Oh, come on," Frypan said.
Newt glanced around the room.
He still wanted to be a Runner—which surprised him, considering what he’d just gone through out in the Maze—but becoming the Keeper right away sounded ridiculous.
"Thomas quietly sighed in relief.
"Minho shrugged.
Give it a month and see if he proves himself.
"If that’s true, we’ll make the change later.
""Fine," Newt responded.
The best should be the Keeper.
He’s the best we have—I swear it.
"Why?
The Keeper didn’t seem surprised, but argued all the same.
He looked to Minho for his reaction.
"The comment hurt Thomas’s feelings, even though he couldn’t disagree.
"Gally was right on that count—stupid idea.
" He looked over at Minho.
As for you being the buggin’ Keeper, forget it.
You’ve proven more in one night than most trainees do in weeks.
I also recommend we elect you as a Runner, effective the second this meeting’s over.
That’s your punishment.
"You broke our bloody Number One Rule, so you get one day in the Slammer.
"Here’s my recommendation," Newt said.
He was just dumbfounded that the whole thing could even be an issue.
"Thomas wasn’t trying to be funny.
Next time I promise I’ll point at them and laugh, then go eat some of Frypan’s dinner.
If you want to throw me in jail for trying to save someone’s life, then go ahead.
To ignore that because of some stupid rule seemed selfish, cowardly, and…	well, stupid.
All I know is I saw two people struggling to get inside these walls and they couldn’t make it.
"I didn’t do anything wrong.
Then he began, not sure of what he’d say before the words came out.
He relaxed them and wiped his sweaty palms on his pants.
"Thomas realized his hands were squeezed up into fists on his lap.
Thomas, defend yourself and then we’ll take the vote on what we should do with you.
"I’d say Gally’s a wee bit ill today, too, so we continue without him.
""For the love, Winston," Newt replied.
"Unless they’re really sick, like Alby.
""We can’t vote without all the members here," Winston insisted.
Let’s get this meeting over with and worry about Gally later.
Newt nodded, looking satisfied.
"Someone snickered and Thomas quit talking, hoping he’d gotten his point across.
But if I remember correctly, we’re here because of what I did out in the Maze, not because some idiot thinks I’m evil.
As for who I really am, you all know just as much as I do.
He seems psychotic to me.
"I don’t know why Gally hates me.
"Thomas quickly gathered his thoughts, grasping for the right words inside the swirling cloud of frustration, confusion and anger in his mind.
This bloody meetin’ can’t be much more screwedup.
"Go ahead.
"                                     Newt glanced up at him and nodded.
"I’m sick of you guys talking about me like I’m not here.
"Can I say something now?" he asked, frustration raising the volume of his voice.
He couldn’t stay silent another second.
What, you think Thomas here is a Griever in disguise?"Council rules or no Council rules, Thomas had finally had enough.
You can’t put too much stock in his rambling nonsense.
"Gally’s psycho.
"Winston, did you see what just happened?" Frypan asked, looking incredulous.
No way, he thought.
He pictured Ben writhing in bed and remembered Alby’s screams.
The idea hadn’t occurred to him before, but would it be worth it to get stung by the Grievers, go through that horrible process, just to remember something?
Why would he make that up?"Thomas thought about the Changing, and the fact that it brought back memories.
That means he has memories, and he said the Greenie looks familiar.
"Well … he has been through the Changing—Griever stung him in the middle of the day just outside the West Door.
His eyes darted around the room before he explained.
Winston looked surprised at the acknowledgment that he’d said anything.
"What?" Minho asked, mirroring Thomas’s thoughts exactly.
"Maybe he had a good point," Winston said, almost too quietly.
He didn’t want to get in any more trouble than he was already in—but he didn’t know how much longer he could last.
"Thomas couldn’t have agreed more and once again almost broke his order to stay quiet, but stopped himself.
He’s dangerous.
The guy is mentally whacked, and you better send someone right now to throw him in the Slammer.
"Dude, he threatened to break my neck and kill Thomas!
""He’s on the Council for a reason," Newt said.
It’s about time someone stood up to his klunk.
Every one of you loved seeing that slinthead get his dues, and you know it.
"Don’t give me that garbage.
That was a little overboard, don’t ya think?"Minho squinched up his eyes and pulled his head back, as if he were baffled by Newt’s question.
"What were you thinking?
"Well, you’re not the bloody saint in the room," Newt said.
Thomas couldn’t tell if he’d meant for the others to hear him.
"He’s finally whacked for good," Minho said, almost in a whisper.
Newt and Winston finally let go of Minho; all three of them sullenly walked to their chairs and sat down.
The Council members stood or sat in silence, seemingly as shocked as Thomas at what they’d just seen.
Insane people could really be capable of anything.
But the thought only increased his worries.
He’s completely insane.
Gally’s crazy, he told himself.
But this was something new—to hear a person say they hate you enough that they want to kill you.
Fear, loneliness, desperation, sadness, even the slightest hint of joy.
He’d been through the whole gamut of emotions in the short time since he’d arrived at the Glade.
Thomas sat frozen in his chair, a sickness growing in his stomach like an infestation.
"Then he turned and left the room, slamming the door behind him.
Kill you if I have to.
"Whatever you came here for—I swear on my life I’m gonna stop it.
When his malicious stare fell back on Thomas, he had one last thing to say.
"He paused, looking at each person in the room.
What these guys decide doesn’t mean jack.
Don’t forget I’ve seen you before—I’ve been through the Changing.
"And you," he said, glaring at Thomas, "the Greenbean who thinks he’s friggin’ God.
Gally yanked the door open and stepped out into the hall, but before anyone could react, he popped his head back in the room.
As if things hadn’t been awkward enough already.
"Thomas’s heart sank.
This, I promise.
Things are going to change.
co.
You’re shameful, and any one of you who stays here is no better.
You should be Banished for your embarrassing inability to lead thiDocsgroup.
"I know you hate me, that you’ve always hated me.
" His maniacal gaze shifted to Newt.
You should not have done that.
"You shouldn’t have done that, Minho.
"Things are different now," he said, spitting on the floor.
He backed toward the door, reached behind him to grab the handle.
Thomas had the sickening thought that Gally looked like someone about to commit murder.
His eyes darted around the room, lit with a burning hatred.
Finally Gally backed away, half stumbling toward the exit behind him.
But he made no move toward Minho; he just stood there with his chest out, heaving ragged breaths.
They pulled him away from Gally, who jumped up, his face a ruddied mask of rage.
"Newt and Winston were on their feet and grabbing Minho before Thomas even knew what was going on.
If you do, I’ll break your shuck neck, right after I’m done with your arms and legs.
Don’t ever speak to me again.
"I swear, Gally," Minho said with a sneer, "don’t ever threaten me again.
Thomas plopped back into his seat, stunned.
Minho stepped closer and stomped the bottom of his foot down on Gally’s back, driving his body flat to the ground.
Gally sprawled across the floor, then scrambled to stand up, struggling to get his hands and feet under him.
Thomas half stood as he watched the Glader crash down into his chair, tipping it over backward, cracking it in two pieces.
Minho laughed, then raised the palm of his hand and shoved Gally in the face.
" Spit flew from his mouth as he spoke.
"Say one more thing like that and I’ll break your neck, right here in front of everybody.
"Gally stood up again, fuming.
So shut your mouth.
You don’t have the right to talk about things you don’t understand.
"Gally," Minho said in a calmer voice, "you’re nothing but a sissy who has never, not once, asked to be a Runner or tried out for it.
His emotions were scattered: appreciation for Minho standing up to everybody on his behalf, disbelief at Gally’s continuous belligerence, fear of what the final decision would be.
Thomas realized his own mouth had dropped wide open.
For you to say anything …"Minho paused, rubbing his eyes, groaning in frustration.
I’ve been here two years, and I’ve never seen anything like it.
"No, you worthless shuck, you don’t get it!
"Minho rounded on him.
"Tommy here is a lucky shank.
Thomas, when he should’ve been wettin’ his pants, took control, defied all laws of physics and gravity to get Alby up onto that wall, diverted the Grievers away from him, beat one off, found—""We get the point," Gally snapped.
I told Thomas we had to split up and I started the practiced evasive maneuvers, running in the patterns.
Then came the Grievers.
"But that wasn’t it.
It’s freaking crazy.
It’s psycho.
Think about the willpower and strength it took him to push Alby up that wall, inch by inch.
But he did.
So when Thomas saw me give up, he shouldn’t have questioned it.
And I was the veteran—the one with all the experience and knowledge.
After that, he saw me give up on Alby, leave him for dead.
"But that was just the beginning.
" He took a deep breath, seeming to gain strength the more he spoke.
And he still stepped out there, just as the Door was closing, only caring that two people needed help.
But plenty of people had told him what it’s like in the Maze, especially at night.
He didn’t get the rules yet.
All this klunk about him breaking a rule is just beyond stupid.
"Just a few days after this guy shows up, he steps out in the Maze to save two shanks he hardly knows.
"Minho stood back up, pointed at Thomas.
We were all like that, for weeks or months, till we had no choice but to shuck it and live.
co every hour, not trusting anybody, refusing to do anything.
Huddling in corners, disoriented,iDocrying.
Think about what we were all like in the beginning.
Dude, he’d been here for just a few days.
He didn’t whine and cry, never seemed scared.
He didn’t panic.
"I’ve never seen anything like it.
"Anyway, listen to me," Minho continued as he took his seat.
Both Gally and Minho looked as if the taut, red skin of their faces was about to burst—but they finally broke their stare.
"The tension was palpable; Thomas felt like the air in the room had become glass that could shatter at any second.
"Defend your proposal and be done with it.
That’s called hypocrisy, you shuck-faced piece of—""Enough," Newt said.
The only reason you were stung is because you broke the same rule you’re blaming Thomas for.
"And believe me, you or nobody else has the slightest clue what it’s like to be out there.
"Gally interjected: "Not if you count the time I—""I don’t!" Minho shouted.
I’m the only Runner in this group, and the only other one here who’s even been out in the Maze is Newt.
"It’s sure easy for you shanks to sit here and talk about something you’re stupid on.
Minho looked exhausted, but he started defending his proposal.
"Thomas couldn’t help feeling eager to hear the response.
Sorry, but you need to talk it up to move it forward.
"That’s some pretty serious klunk, brother.
He scratched out a few lines on the paper, then looked up at Minho.
" Newt walked back to his chair and sat down, putting the pad in his lap.
Thomas expected more outbursts, but was surprised when everyone nodded their consent, even Gally.
"Are we clear?"Quiet had swept across the group.
" He walked from end to end of the curved row of sitting Keepers, looking each of them in the eye as he spoke.
Act like it, or we’ll disband this bloody Council and start from scratch.
We may not look it, but around these parts we’re adults.
"I’ve never seen so many shanks acting like teat- suckin’ babies.
"Shuck it," Newt said.
Gradually, though, order was restored and everyone sat down.
Thomas watched on as at first no one seemed to hear or notice Newt at all.
Finally, Newt put his notepad down and stepped out from the semicircle, screaming at people to shut up.
He looked back up, wishing he were a thousand miles away.
Newt said it takes forever just to become a Runner, much less the Keeper.
Has to be a joke, he thought.
Why had Minho said that?
When everyone started talking at once, Thomas put his head in his hands to wait it out, terrified and awed at the same time.
Winston shook his head adamantly, saying something that Thomas couldn’t quite make out.
Others didn’t.
Some Keepers seemed to actually agree with Minho’s recommendation—like Frypan, who clapped to drown out Gally, clamoring to take a vote.
"Any pity Thomas had felt for Gally, however remote, completely vanished at that statement.
"He should be kicked off the Council for saying something so stupid.
"That’s ridiculous!" He faced Newt and pointed back at Minho, who had taken his seat again.
Gally finally broke the spell, standing up.
Thomas sat stunned, waiting for the Runner to say he’d been kidding.
"Complete silence filled the room, as if the world had been frozen, and every member of the Council stared at Minho.
"I nominate this shank to replace me as Keeper of the Runners.
"Minho looked at Thomas.
"Tell us, then.
"Good that," Newt said.
"Thomas held his breath, wondering what he’d say.
I want to say my recommendation and be done with it.
No blabbin’ on and on like Gally.
"I was out there; I saw what this guy did—he stayed strong while I turned into a panty-wearin’ chicken.
Minho stood quickly, taking everyone off guard.
" Thomas was elated that it was finally Minho’s turn; surely he’d defend him to the end.
"Go ahead, last but not least.
"With no more words for Gally, Newt pointed at Minho.
And I’m right.
Are you done?""Yes, I’m done.
We heard you, and we’ll all consider your bloody recommendation.
"I’m sorry.
"Fine, Gally," Newt said.
But I still hate him, Thomas thought.
Gally was a Keeper, after all.
"For the first time, Thomas felt a little empathy for Gally—he did have a point about how Newt was treating him.
Quit voting me down before you even think about what I’m saying.
How can we trust this shank after less than a week?
"I’m dead serious.
"Quit being such a smart aleck, Newt," he spat, his face flushing red.
"Finished, Captain Gally?" Newt asked.
"More rumblings broke out, and Newt wrote something on his pad, shaking his head the whole time—which gave Thomas a tinge of hope.
coa month, and then have another review.
Something ain’t right, and until we figure it out, I officially recommend that we lock his butt in the SlammeriDoc—for.
And he just happens to be the first person to survive a night out in the Maze.
"There’s too many weird things going on, and it all started when this shuck-face Greenie showed up.
He was anxious to defend himself and almost broke his silence for the first time—but before he could get a word in, Gally was talking again.
Could they actually believe what Gally was saying?
How do we know it was the Greenie who tied Alby up there?"Gally paused; no one said a word for several seconds, and panic rose inside Thomas’s chest.
Well, neither Minho nor anyone else actually saw him do anything in the vines.
Thomas conveniently finds himself in the Maze for the night, then tries to convince everyone he’s a hero.
We find a dead Griever.
"Day after he shows up, a psycho girl comes, spoutin’ off that things are gonna change, clutching that freaky note.
"We can’t trust this shank," he continued.
Newt finally calmed everyone down again, but Gally wasn’t finished.
"Another uproar exploded in the room; Thomas could do nothing but shake his head—he just didn’t get how Gally could come up with all these ideas.
"How ’bout having a bloody point?" "I think he’s a spy from the people who put us here.
""What’re you tryin’ to say, Gally?" Newt asked.
I ain’t buyin’ it.
How could he have done what he did out there after just a few days?
"I think it was all an act.
Gally continued his rant.
"Thomas shrank into his chair, hoping that others hadn’t been thinking anything like that.
A few days later, he’s running around the Maze with Grievers, acting like he owns the place.
"This slinthead comes up in the Box, acting all confused and scared.
"Just think about it," Gally began.
Though Thomas wasn’t that afraid of him anymore, he still hated the guy’s guts.
It made Thomas feel a little better that the temporary Council Chair despised Gally almost as much as he did.
""Then bloody say it," Newt replied.
"I still wanna say something.
""No!" Gally yelled, making a couple of Keepers jump in their seats.
"Go on, then, Minho.
"Good that," Newt said with yet another roll of the eyes.
Then just keep your mouth shut.
"Great, Thomas thought.
"I think I’ve made my opinions pretty clear already.
Gally went first.
The latter hadn’t said a word since Thomas had entered the room; he just sat there, drooped in his chair, looking like he hadn’t slept in a week.
Thomas could barely listen anymore, anticipating the comments from the last two Keepers, Gally and Minho.
Or both.
Some thought he should be praised, some thought he should be punished.
Down the line they went.
But deep inside he couldn’t bring himself to disagree—as odd as it seemed after what he’d accomplished, he had broken a major rule.
"Thomas hated all this talk about punishment, even more than he hated having to keep his mouth shut.
Next.
I’m reservin’ my recommendation until I hear everyone out.
He should be punished, but then we need to figure out a way to use him.
"I agree with the lot of ya.
Then it was Newt’s turn.
Two more Keepers spoke, one for Frypan’s idea, one for Winston’s.
Thomas’s heart fell just a bit.
"Gally clapped, earning a scowl from Newt.
cot make sure everyone knows about it so they don’t get any ideas.
What kind?" "I think he should be put in the Slammer for a week with only bread and water—and weiDocneed.
"So you’re recommendin’ punishment.
""Okay," Newt said, writing on his pad.
He broke our Number One Rule.
If we don’t punish him, we’ll set a bad example.
No offense, Greenie, but Newt, you’re the one always harping about order.
"I think he should be punished.
Next was acne- covered Winston, Keeper of the Blood House.
But he forced himself to follow Newt’s orders and keep quiet.
Still, he was having a hard time just sitting there; he desperately wanted to speak on his own behalf.
Thomas was feeling more and more relieved—it seemed like most of the Keepers were for him, not against him.
The kid nodded and Newt scribbled a note.
Why punish a guy for saving someone’s life?""So you do have an opinion—is that it?" Newt insisted, pencil in hand.
"If anything, I agree with Frypan, I guess.
" He shrugged.
""Sorry, I honestly don’t.
"Lot of good it did to choose you for the Council, then.
"What?" Newt asked angrily.
"I don’t really have an opinion," he said.
" He finished writing and pointed to the third member of the Council, a kid Thomas hadn’t met yet with black hair and a freckly face.
You know the rules—no idea’s unacceptable— and you’ll all have your say when we vote on it.
"Now everyone keep their bloody mouths shut, I mean it.
"All right, writin’ her down," Newt said as he did just that, scribbling on a notepad.
Thomas winced; Frypan had gone too far with that recommendation, almost invalidating his well-stated opinion of the whole mess.
"Voices erupted from every direction, and it took Newt half a minute to calm everyone down.
"Put him on the freaking Council and have him train us on everything he did out there.
Frypan folded his arms.
"So what’re ya recommendin’?" Newt asked.
"Thomas wanted to walk over and shake Frypan’s hand—he’d just said exactly what Thomas himself had been thinking about all of this.
As Chuck would say, this is a pile of klunk.
"How stupid is this—he saves Alby’s life, kills a couple of Grievers, and we’re sitting here yappin’ about what to do with him.
" He paused, as if expecting a laugh, but none came.
"Shank’s got more guts than I’ve fried up from every pig and cow in the last year.
"The cook smiled through his beard and sat up straighter.
You’re next, Frypan.
Any official recommendations?" Zart shook his head.
"Is that it?
Newt sat down and motioned to Zart.
""Please," Gally whispered sarcastically, the ridiculous scowl returning as he slouched back into his chair again.
"I’m the bloody Chair right now, and if I hear one more buggin’ word out of turn from you, I’ll be arrangin’ another Banishing for your sorry butt.
""Gally, shut your hole!" Newt yelled, standing for effect this time; once again Thomas felt like cheering.
"I bet Minho’s the one who actually got rid of the stupid things.
"Oh, give me a break," Gally spurted.
He made a promise to himself to beextra nice to Zart.
He had someone else on his side.
co.
" Relief flooded Thomas.
Now we know we can survive out there, and that we can beat the GriDocevers.
"But then again, he’s … changed things.
" He paused and looked down at his hands, rubbing them together.
We can’t just let people think that’s okay.
He broke one of our most important rules.
"Well," Zart began, his eyes darting around almost like he was waiting for someone else to tell him what to say.
He looked to Thomas more out of place than a carrot on a tomato plant.
"There were a few snickers as Zart, the quiet big guy who watched over the Gardens, shifted in his seat.
"Zart the Fart, you start.
Good that?" He waited for a nod of consent from Thomas—who gave it reluctantly—then pointed to the kid in the chair on the far right.
And Tommy, you’re not allowed to say a buggin’ thing until we ask you to.
One at a time.
"You’ll have your chance, Gally.
"Gally leaned forward, but Newt cut him off before he could say anything.
We need to decide what we’re gonna do with him.
"Reason we’re here is because almost every lovin’ kid in the Glade has come up to me in the last day or two either boohooing about Thomas or beggin’ to take his bloody hand in marriage.
" Another roll of the eyes.
"Glad we got that out of the way.
Newt gave Gally a hard stare, then continued.
He was having a harder and harder time believing he’d been terrified of this guy just a day earlier—he seemed silly, even pathetic now.
Gally folded his arms and leaned back in his chair, the scowl on his face so forced that Thomas almost laughed out loud.
"Thomas wished he could cheer at that.
If you’re gonna blabber your shuck mouth every time I say something, you can go ahead and bloody leave, because I’m not in a very cheerful mood.
"Gally," Newt said, "try to keep some buggin’ order, here.
Thomas suddenly wanted to be as far from that room as possible.
"This started off a rumbling of murmurs and whispers, but Newt shushed them.
"He’s just a rule breaker now.
"He’s not the Greenie anymore," Gally said, his scratchy voice so low and cruel it was almost comical.
"Thomas’s face flushed with embarrassment.
"As you all know, the last few days have been bloody crazy, and quite a bit seems centered around our Greenbean, Tommy, seated before us.
"In place of our leader, sick in bed, I declare this Gathering begun," he said, with a subtle roll of his eyes as if he hated anything approaching formality.
He sat in the chair to the right of Alby’s empty seat.
He was at least relieved that Newt was there.
Thomas wasn’t cold, but shivered all the same.
There were no windows; the room smelled of mildew and old books.
The walls were made of wood, as was the floor, and it didn’t look like anyone had ever attempted to make the place look inviting.
Besides the chairs, there was no other furniture except for a small table in the corner.
They sat in a large room of the Homestead that Thomas hadn’t been in before.
One chair directly in front of Thomas stood empty—he didn’t need to be told that it was Alby’s.
Once settled, he realized they were the Keepers, and to his chagrin that meant Gally was among them.
They were seated in chairs arranged in a semicircle around him.
The next morning, Thomas found himself sitting in a chair, worried and anxious, sweating, facing eleven other boys.
"And with that, he turned and walked away, leaving Thomas to wonder why in the world a Gathering was needed just to talk about him.
You’re the only buggin’ thing on the agenda.
And you’ll be there.
"I’ve called a Gathering.
Why?" Thomas didn’t like the sound of this.
" "Tomorrow?
"You’ll find out after the wake-up.
"Patience," Newt said.
""Like what?" Thomas didn’t know which was more unsettling—that people thought he was some kind of hero, or that some wished he didn’t exist.
Lotta stuff to talk about.
Half the Gladers think you’re God, the other half wanna throw your butt down the Box Hole.
"Turned this whole place upside down, you bloody shank.
What’re you talking about?"Newt stood, stretched his arms.
"Do with me?
" Thomas perked up at that, confused by the statement.
"Anyway, next up—figure out what we do with Tommy here.
Newt finally broke the silence.
Thomas wondered again about his inexplicable feeling of connection with her, though it had faded a little—but that could have been because of everything else occupying his thoughts.
"A long pause followed, as if the three of them were trying to come up with an explanation for the girl.
It’s kind of weird.
She takes the food, seems to be doing all right.
Every once in a while she’ll mumble something—nonsense, like she’s dreaming.
"Still in the buggin’ coma, or whatever it is.
""No," Newt answered.
"I saw the Med-jacks feeding her upstairs.
Plus, his thoughts kept going back to her.
He was in no mood to talk about Gally.
""Anything new on the girl?" Thomas asked, changing the subject.
"Gally’s the worst of ’em all.
"Tell me about it," Chuck chimed in.
Thomas knew he was thinking about how Alby might never be the same again.
" His voice was distant, his eyes having strayed to a certain blank spot in the woods.
There’s a handful around the Glade, but I can’t stand to be around them.
Unlikable.
They get … different.
"Shanks who’ve been through it’ll never really talk about it.
Sure about what?""Are they changed because they want to go back to their old life, or is it because they’re so depressed at realizing their old life was no better than what we have now?"Newt stared at him for a second, then looked away, seemingly deep in thought.
Newt looked confused.
"Are you sure?" he asked.
" Thomas’s mind was churning.
Anyway, it’s like being given your old life back, only to have it snatched away again.
Anyone who goes through it acts like a bloody psycho when it’s over—although usually not as bad as poor Ben.
Just little snippets, but definite memories of before we came to this horrible place.
"It brings back memories.
Why do you call it the Changing?"Newt relaxed, seemed to shrink, even, and sighed.
"Hey, I know it sucks to see your friend go through that, but I just want to know what’s really happening up there.
He didn’t want to make Newt any more upset than he already was, but he needed answers.
Enough explanation for ya there, Tommy?"Thomas frowned.
If you do get the Serum, then your body wigs out and shakes and your skin bubbles and turns a freaky green color and you vomit all over yourself.
"All we bloody know is if the Grievers sting you with their nasty needles, you inject the Grief Serum or you die.
"You think we do?" he spat, throwing his arms up, then slapping them back down on his knees.
"Newt’s response startled Thomas.
Seriously, I don’t get what this Changing thing is.
"Newt, what’s he going through up there?
He turned to the older boy, trying his best to be casual.
"Thomas couldn’t imagine how bad the whole ordeal must be—but the whole process of the Changing was still a mystery to him.
Maybe a little screaming now and then.
"The bugger should be sleepin’ for a couple of days, then wake up okay.
"I think the worst part’s over," Newt said.
Still, Thomas was glad to have him around.
He sat on the ground in front of them, as sad and worried as any person could possibly appear.
"They sat in silence until, a few minutes later, Newt walked up, looking like death on two feet.
Finally, half under his breath, he murmured, "Same reason we all feel crappy.
The boy just sat clasping his hands as he leaned forward on his knees, head hanging.
Wanna answer me that?"Thomas searched Chuck’s face for an answer, but by the looks of it he didn’t have one.
"Then why do I feel so crappy, Chuck?
"Thomas tossed the empty plate on the ground, suddenly angry.
You and Minho, both.
""Don’t get all humbly bumbly on us—what you did is freaking unbelievable.
"Any idiot on the planet would’ve done that.
""The ‘wait-and-dive thingy’?" Thomas asked, rolling his eyes.
He saw you do the wait-and-dive thingy, then had the idea to do the same thing at the Cliff.
""Not according to him.
"Tricking them to go over the Cliff was Minho’s idea, not mine.
Alby was still in bed, screaming his head off in pain—probably wishing he were dead.
Thomas was sickened by the happiness he’d just felt.
"A surge of pride filled Thomas’s body, then fizzled.
Can’t imagine what those shanks are talking about.
Next, you become one of the first people ever to survive an entire night outside the Glade, and to top it all off you kill four Grievers.
Then you turn into some kind of freaky jungle dude, climbing vines and tying people up on walls.
First, you go out in the Maze when you’re not supposed to, at night.
"What’s that supposed to mean?""Oh, gee, let me think.
"Thomas sat up straighter, not sure how he felt about the news.
"That reminds me—you’re the talk of the town.
"A quick expression of hurt flashed across Chuck’s face, making Thomas feel bad, but vanished almost as fast as it had appeared.
co— see if they laugh.
"You should go entertain the GriDocevers.
" "That’s funny," Thomas said, sarcasm lacing his voice.
"It’s like watching a starving pig eat his own klunk.
"You’re disgusting when you eat," Chuck said, sitting on the bench next to him.
He hadn’t realized how hungry he was until he’d started eating.
He took a big swig of his drink, then went back to attacking the food.
"I so needed this," he mumbled through a huge bite.
He scooped the beef and noodles off the plate as fast as his aching arms could move.
"Thanks," Thomas said, feeling a burst of warmth for the kid.
Just after dark, Chuck brought him some dinner and a big glass of cold water.
Thomas had no memory of his life before the Box, but he was positive he’d finished the worst twenty-four hours of his existence.
Eventually, the day dragged to a close, and the setting of the sun brought the now-familiar grinding of the four Doors closing for the night.
He had to squeeze his hands to his ears every time he heard them.
Alby’s screams, now distant but still audible, only made it worse.
Sadness filled him like a heavy poison.
Living in a giant maze, surrounded by hideous beasts.
This is my life , he thought.
And now he was one of them.
The fact that the Gladers hadn’t given up said more about these people than anything else.
If Newt and the others hadn’t been able to solve the Maze after two years of searching, it seemed impossible there could actually be a solution.
But those thoughts just led back to the hopelessness that had filled him so many times already.
For the first time, he felt a hunger to get revenge on the people responsible for sending him there.
It wasn’t just a matter of escape.
He understood more than ever the passion the Gladers felt for finding their way out of the Maze.
Then, How could anyone be evil enough to do this to us?
How could anyone ever be happy in a life like this?
It seemed as if all the realities of living there had finally settled in his mind, like hearing a final diagnosis of terminal cancer.
But even that wasn’t as bad as the heavy emotional weight of what he’d been through the previous night.
Every muscle ached; cuts and bruises covered him from head to toe.
The elation of his escape had faded rapidly, leaving him with pain and thoughts of his new life in the Glade.
He’d hurt too much to do anything after that, and had spent most of the day on a bench on the outskirts of the Deadheads, wallowing in despair.
He’d had no idea it was possible to feel so exhausted, despite the few hours of sleep he’d gotten.
Thomas was too tired to put up a fight.
It’ll only make it worse, he’d said, and would not be swayed.
Newt had adamantly refused when Thomas asked to see the person he’d risked his life for.
It was impossible to escape the terrible sound, even after Thomas finally talked the Med- jacks into letting him go— weary, sore, bandaged, but tired of the piercing, agonized wails of their leader.
Twilight fell upon the Glade and Alby’s screams continued to haunt the air.
Troubling thoughts all around.
And what if he became as psychotic as Ben?
Now the boy was in intense pain, going through the same things as Ben.
But had it been worth it?
It’d seemed such a victory just to save his life, bring him back from a night in the Maze.
Thomas wondered long and hard about Alby.
"As if brought on by the words, a blood-chilling scream erupted from a room down the hall.
"He just started the Changing.
But then Chuck’s next words made him reconsider.
"Thomas’s grogginess instantly washed away, replaced with relief—it surprised him how much joy the information brought.
"Alby’s okay—the Serum worked.
"He’s alive," he said.
"Know what?" He looked at Chuck again, confused by his big smile.
"Thomas rubbed his eyes and yawned.
""I thought you’d want to know.
"Let me sleep, you shank.
He focused in on Chuck, groaned.
It took several seconds for Thomas to get his bearings and see straight.
Hours later—days for all he knew—Chuck was there, shaking him awake.
The second thing was the girl.
co across the torso of both beetle blades—WICKED—ran through his thoughts again and again.
First, the word he’d seeniDocsrawled.
But as he fell asleep, two things wouldn’t leave his mind.
Finally, he was left alone, his head resting on the softest pillow his limited memory could recall.
Pain.
Escorted into the Homestead by a couple of Med-jacks, up the stairs, a glimpse through a barely ajar door of someone feeding the comatose girl in her bed—he felt an incredibly strong urge to go see her, to check on her—into their own rooms, into bed, food, water, bandages.
The next few minutes were a blur.
Almost.
It almost disturbed Thomas how good that felt.
When he got to within five feet, the other boy’s stare fell to the ground.
It took every ounce of his willpower, but he looked directly into Gally’s eyes, never breaking contact.
He almost stopped walking altogether when he spotted Gally up ahead, arms folded and glaring, but he kept moving.
Thomas knew it was because they’d accomplished something never done before, but he was embarrassed by the attention.
Their faces showed complete awe, as if they were watching two ghosts strolling through a graveyard.
The walk back into the Glade and then to the Homestead seemed endless, a row of Gladers on both sides gawking at them.
He relented, glancing back up at Alby, then followed Minho out and away from the Maze.
"And Thomas knew he was right.
And bandages.
"We need sleep.
He started to speak but Minho grabbed him by the arm and forced him to walk toward the Glade.
"Thomas wanted to wait and see if Alby was okay.
I want the whole story when they’re done and you’re rested up.
You look bloody awful.
"You and Minho get your butts inside, get yourselves checked by the Med-jacks.
""When you left him …" Newt shook his head.
Was when I left him up there.
"Is he … alive?"Please let him be, Thomas thought.
If he’d seemed shocked before, now he looked completely bewildered.
Newt finally saw his friend hanging in the ivy, and looked back at Thomas.
He was still there, and in one piece, but there was no sign of movement.
Without saying anything, Thomas pointed up, not daring to be relieved yet.
" Thomas headed to the right, craning his neck to look high up at the wall, searching along the thick vines until he found the spot where Alby hung by his arms and legs far above them.
He’s alive?""Just come here.
" Newt’s face went white.
"We have to save Alby.
"How in the bloody—""We’ll tell you later," Thomas interrupted.
"What happened?" he asked; he sounded almost angry.
At the boys’ appearance, Newt limped over to them.
They’d made it back.
The West Door to the Glade towered over them and it was open.
Relief washed through him an instant later when he realized it was Newt and a group of Gladers.
The next time they rounded a corner, Thomas faltered, his heart skipping a beat when he saw movement up ahead.
They tried to pick up the pace, but their bodies hurt too much and they settled back into a slow walk despite the urgency.
"Let’s just hurry, is all I’m saying," Thomas said, hoping all that effort to save Alby hadn’t been wasted.
theco one chasing me?"Minho looked over at him, a blank expression on his face.
"What if another Griever got Alby after I divertediDoc.
He’d been avoiding it, denying it to himself.
"The boys kept walking, Minho almost looking happy, but something was nagging at Thomas.
I gotta see this hanging-on-the-wall thing myself—I think you’re shuckin’ me.
We somehow got it into our klunk heads that once the Doors closed, you were done—end of story.
If he’s still alive, there’s really no reason to think Alby can’t be saved by the Serum.
"We’ve never talked about this before.
"Weird, though," Minho finally continued.
And for some reason, he kept thinking of the girl.
He wondered about the Changing, and what it meant.
"A minute or two passed in silence as Thomas processed the information; they made a couple more turns.
They go through the Changing—which sucks—but after that, they’re healed.
"Stick that sucker in someone who’s been stung and it saves ’em.
" He made a show of sticking a needle in his arm.
It’s a medicine or antidote or something, already inside a medical syringe, ready to use.
It’s with the supplies in the Box every week, always has been.
"I don’t know where we got the names, but the Serum comes from the Creators—or that’s what we call them, at least.
And why are Grievers called Grievers?"Minho explained as they continued through the endless turns of the Maze, neither one of them leading now.
Why is it called that?
"Just when I think I’ve learned everything about this stupid place.
"Thomas forced out a pathetic laugh.
The Grief Serum.
It’s a serum.
And where does it come from?""Just what it sounds like, shank.
What is that?
"I’ve heard that a couple of times now.
"Okay—this Serum," Thomas said.
The boy’s pace was picking up, but Thomas stayed on his heels, surprised at how familiar he felt with the directions, usually even leaning into turns before Minho showed the way.
They turned yet another corner, Minho suddenly taking the lead.
" He seemed excited by his line of thinking.
Because no one who’d been stung and didn’t make it back by sunset has ever survived, we just assumed that was the point of no return—when it’s too late to get the Serum.
We’ve been wrong—well, hopefully we’ve been wrong.
"I think you just figured it out.
"Minho looked up, surprise transforming his face.
"After what we just went through, I think I can imagine.
"Thomas shuddered at the thought.
And all of them were killed in ways you don’t wanna hear about.
The poor shanks who got stuck out in the Maze all night weren’t found until later—days later, sometimes, if at all.
And those are the ones who got the Serum and went through the Changing.
A few guys have been stung by the needles during the day.
"I don’t know, I guess this has never happened before.
Alby was only stuck with one of those needles, right?"Minho stood up and joined Thomas in his slow walk back toward the Glade.
"That’s because they’ve always been killed by the Grievers by the time you found them.
"Because no one’s ever made it …"He trailed off, and Thomas knew what he was thinking.
" He started limping back along the corridor.
"How do you know?
"Thomas refused to believe it.
"No way he’s still alive.
Minho looked down, his eyes dejected.
" Seeing the look of confusion on Minho’s face, he quickly explained what he’d done with the ropes of ivy.
"Gotta get Alby off the wall.
" Straining, he forced himself to get to his feet.
"We have to get back.
Thomas remembered Alby.
coWith a jolt, all thoughts of the Cliff were forgotten.
My head hurts too much to think about itiDoc.
"Maybe they’re magic.
Minho shrugged again.
"Well, the rock didn’t disappear, now, did it?""Then what do you think happened?" There was something significant here, Thomas could feel it.
"How does that prove them wrong?"Minho shrugged.
He turned back toward Minho.
Down and down it went, not leaving his sight until it grew too small to see.
"Thomas watched as Minho tossed a rock over the Cliff, then followed its path with his eyes.
Look.
Couple of Gladers had a theory that other things had disappeared, but we proved ’em wrong.
""Yeah, that was kinda psycho.
"Seems like they disappeared or something after they went over the edge.
There was something very strange and unsettling about it.
"Thomas couldn’t stop wondering about how the Grievers’ enraged cries had ended as they fell from the Cliff, and how he hadn’t been able to see them plummeting to their deaths.
It’s kind of hard to ask a dead guy what he did wrong.
"What did we do differently?""I don’t know.
But all he felt was tired and relieved.
"Thomas knew he should feel proud, brave, something.
We made it through the whole night—never been done before.
"I can’t believe it.
" He shifted his body, wincing and groaning.
"Somehow we made it to sunrise, or we would’ve had ten more on our butts before long.
Did we just kill them all?"Minho snorted.
"Are there more of them?
Minho said nothing, just nodded, his face devoid of expression.
"I can’t believe we’re still alive," he said.
He looked over at Minho, huddled against the hall of the corridor.
At least the Doors would be opening soon, and they could return to the Glade.
Things seemed to hurt on him and inside him that he’d never known existed before.
He rolled over onto his back, groaning at the movement.
Has to be an illusion.
It can’t be.
But that was impossible, he thought.
It seemed as if the Maze was perched on a structure several miles above the ground.
But even with the ever-increasing light, he still couldn’t tell what was down there.
He stared straight down, saw that the stone wall of the Maze went toward the ground in a sheer cliff until it disappeared into whatever lay far, far below.
The open sky in front of him was a deep purple, slowly fading into the bright blue of day, with tinges of orange from the sun on a distant, flat horizon.
He crawled to the edge of the Cliff once more, stuck his head over again to get a better look now that dawn was in full force.
And his sore hands and utter exhaustion didn’t help.
Despite his lack of memory, he was sure he’d just been through the most traumatic night of his life.
But there wasn’t a shred of self-control left in him; he couldn’t have prevented the tears, he knew that.
Thomas had finally stopped crying; he couldn’t help wondering what Minho would think of him, or if he’d tell others, calling him a sissy.
Neither Thomas nor Minho had moved an inch.
A half hour passed.
Then, finally, came the tears.
His last ounce of strength disappeared, and he curled into a ball on the ground.
His mind couldn’t process the thought of where the Cliff led or what had happened to the terrible creatures.
Nothing.
But impossibly, they were gone—not even a sign of them in the emptiness that stretched below.
Thomas quickly scrambled to the edge of the abyss, poking his head over to see the falling Grievers.
They both connected, sending the last monster plummeting to its death.
Both boys ran in at the Griever and jumped feetfirst at the creature, kicking out at the last second with every waning bit of strength.
Looking to Minho, he nodded, then turned.
Instinctively Thomas knew what he had to do.
The fourth and final approaching creature was able to stop in time, teetering on the very edge of the cliff, a spike and a claw holding it in place.
Again, neither of them made a sound as they fell—as if they’d disappeared instead of falling.
The nerve-grinding squeal of the spike cutting through the ground sent a shiver up Thomas’s spine, though a second later the Griever tumbled into the abyss.
The third one planted a heavily spiked arm into the stone, but its momentum was too much.
Thomas landed against the wall and spun just in time to see the second creature tumble over the edge, not able to stop itself.
Oddly, its battle cry cut off sharply instead of fading as it plummeted to the depths beyond.
The monster flew off the edge of the Cliff.
The tactic had worked for Thomas earlier, and judging by the horrible screeching sound that escaped the first Griever, it had worked again.
Just as the first Griever’s arm extended out to nip at them, Minho and Thomas dove in opposite directions, each toward one of the outer walls of the corridor.
"Now!" screamed Minho.
He just wanted to close his eyes and never see another Griever again.
"Not yet … not yet …"Thomas hated every millisecond of waiting.
Dozens of yards had become dozens of feet, and the monsters were only seconds away from crashing into the waiting biDocys.
.
co "Ready," Minho said steadily.
But one after the other, they rolled down the stone hallway, clicking and moaning and ready to kill.
Maybe the Maze proved just narrow enough to make it awkward for them to travel side by side.
"On my mark!"Why the Grievers had lined up single file was a mystery.
"We need to be in sync!" Minho yelled, almost drowned out by the earsplitting sounds of the thundering spikes rolling along the stone.
The only thing left for them was courage.
Their heels were only inches from the edge of the Cliff behind them, nothing but air waiting after that.
"They shuffled their feet until they stood scrunched up together in front of the drop-off at the very middle of the corridor, facing the Grievers.
I’m ready.
"I know.
Stand here, close to me, facing—"Thomas cut him off.
"These things may be vicious," Minho said, "but they’re dumb as dirt.
Everything clicked, then, even before Minho explained what they were going to do.
They were now only dozens of yards away, single file, charging in with a vengeance, moving surprisingly fast.
He shook himself back to reality and turned to face the oncoming Grievers.
Seeing the vast, open sky in front of and below him had put him into some kind of hypnotized stupor.
Thomas remembered hearing the word Cliff before, but couldn’t place it at the moment.
"Did you forget something?" He nodded back toward the inside of the Maze.
" He grabbed Thomas’s shoulder.
"You wouldn’t be the first shank to fall off the Cliff.
"Careful," the Runner replied.
"I don’t get it," he whispered, not knowing if Minho could even hear him.
It was like somebody had built the Maze and then set it afloat in the sky to hover there in the middle of nothing for the rest of eternity.
Thomas stared in complete disbelief, not understanding how it could all be possible.
Dawn was beginning to make its mark, the sky seeming to have lightened considerably even in the last minute or so.
It was a strange and unsettling sight, like he was standing at the edge of the universe, and for a brief moment he was overcome by vertigo, his knees weakening before he steadied himself.
All Thomas could see in every direction, up and down, side to side, was empty air and fading stars.
They had indeed reached a way out of the Maze, but like Minho had said, it was nothing to get excited about.
The sounds of the onrushing Grievers grew closer, but he had to see.
Thomas slowed, then walked up to where the Maze opened out into open sky.
A few feet before the end of the corridor, Minho pulled up, holding his hand out over Thomas’s chest to make sure he stopped, too.
"Don’t get excited," he said, barely able to get the words out.
After years of searching, how did Minho and I find it this easily?Minho seemed to sense his thoughts.
he wondered.
How?
As they got closer, he finally realized that it was an opening—the Maze ended.
He could see stars.
The two ivy-covered walls on either side of him seemed to intersect with nothing but sky up ahead.
Thomas narrowed his eyes as they ran toward the wall of darkness, trying to comprehend what they were approaching.
It ended in blackness.
The corridor didn’t end in another stone wall.
And the faint light emanating from their pursuers made the oddity up ahead all the more apparent.
It seemed … wrong.
A few turns later, Thomas saw something ahead of them that didn’t register with his brain.
But he ran on, hoped his heart didn’t quit pumping.
Every inch of his body hurt, inside and out; his limbs cried for him to quit running.
Without having to look behind him, he knew the Grievers were gaining ground at an alarming rate.
"Thomas didn’t bother wasting his own breath on questions; he just kept running, following Minho.
Between heaving breaths, he gasped, "I just saw … the dive move you did … back there … gave me an idea … we only have to last … a little while longer.
As they rounded the next corner, Minho attempted to speak.
Minho seemed to know exactly what he was doing, where he was going; he never paused to think about which way they should run.
Together, they ran through corridors, taking turn after turn.
Without a moment to think, Thomas collected himself.
"What—""Shut up and follow me!" Minho yelled, already dragging Thomas away until he was able to get his feet under him.
He stopped when he realized it was Minho.
Thomas’s heart leaped into his throat as he struggled to free himself.
Then, three corridors down, two hands suddenly reached out and yanked him into the adjoining hallway.
Sure that he was pushing his body beyond its physical limits, he ran on, trying to rid himself of the hopeless feeling that it was only a matter of time before they got him.
Sounds of pursuit, this time from all four Grievers, followed close behind.
He scrambled to his feet and sprinted forward.
But now, no longer surrounded, Thomas had a clear shot away, back down the path.
With a metallic howl, it swiveled and readied to pounce on its victim.
Unable to stop its momentum, the Griever zoomed straight past him before it shuddered to a halt—Thomas noticed the thing was moving a lot faster now.
At the last second before collision, just as he got a close look at the metal and hair and slime, Thomas planted his left foot and dove to the right.
The sudden movement almost made Thomas stop, his brief moment of insane courage washing away, but he kept running.
The Griever came to life, spikes popping out of its skin; it rolled forward, ready to collide head-on with its foe.
Taking heart at the slight falter, Thomas started screaming as he charged.
The ugly thing retracted just an inch, stopped moving its claw, as if shocked at his boldness.
Much preferring one over three, he ran straight toward the Griever that had chased him there.
He’d go down fighting.
Almost consumed by grief, he made a decision.
Not even a week of salvageable memory, and his life was over.
After all that effort, here he was, surrounded by Grievers.
It knows I’m done, he thought.
Thomas turned to see his original pursuer still coming, though it had slowed a bit, clasping and unclasping a metal claw as if mocking him, laughing.
Three Grievers were up ahead, rolling along as they dug their spikes into the stone, coming directly toward him.
Panting uncontrollably, he stared.
When he rounded the next corner, he skidded to a halt at the sight in front of him.
He wondered if it’d just be easier to turn and fight, get it over with.
With great, sucking heaves of breath, he tried to get oxygen in his lungs, but he knew he couldn’t last much longer.
On and on he ran, his heart ready to blow its way out of his chest.
The sounds of pursuit from behind didn’t relent or fade, but he wasn’t losing ground, either.
Another long corridor.
Two lefts.
Right.
Left.
Down a long corridor, then right again.
Right, then left.
Somewhere in his mind he tracked his own movements, hoping he’d live long enough to use the information to return to the Door again.
Pounding the stone with his feet, he fled as fast as he possibly could.
He rounded a corner of the Maze, then another.
But Thomas refused to look back, knowing every second counted.
A booming crash sounded behind him, followed by the rolling, cracking, whirring of the Griever.
As soon as his feet hit the solid stone floor, he took off, running despite the scream of exhaustion from his body.
He gripped the plant just enough to slow him down as he slid to the ground, ignoring the horrible burn.
Flailing once again, Thomas found a new vine and clutched it with both hands.
He felt a deep scratch on his back.
He swung his body out and to the left; then he jumped toward the wall of the Maze, trying to grab another vine; the Griever’s vicious tools snapped and clawed at him from behind.
As soon as he made contact with the Griever’s body, disgustingly sinking inches into its gushy skin, he kicked out with both feet to push off, squirming to avoid the swarm of needles and claws coming at him from all directions.
Pulsing with adrenaline, Thomas drew his legs together and pulled them tight against his chest.
A sharp crack revealed a small victory, but any elation ended when he realized that the momentum of his swing was now pulling him backdown to land right on top of the creature.
Thomas kicked out with his right leg, connecting with the arm attached to the claw.
He pushed off the wall with both feet as hard as he could, swinging his body away from it just as the Griever charged in with its claw and needles.
Thomas found a vine halfway to the ground and grasped it, his arms almost ripping out of their sockets at the sudden stop.
It had altered its course and was almost on him, reaching out with its clasping claw.
At the same instant, he saw the Griever out of the corner of his left eye.
Throwing his arms out, Thomas flailed, reaching and grabbing to stop his plunge to the hard stone below.
He slammed into the stone ahead, losing his grip on the vine.
On his next swing, the darkness prevented Thomas from seeing a new wall looming in front of him until it was too late; the corridor ended and turned to the right.
The adrenaline rushing through his body helped push away his fear—he just kept moving.
Scorching pain flared up both his arms; he felt the sting of raw skin on his hands.
Three swings later he’d made his way halfway to the Maze floor.
And the next.
He did the same with the next vine.
The ivy-rope burned his palm, but he’d slipped several feet closer to the ground.
On the next switch, he let his hand slip a bit before clasping tightly.
Somehow, he had to get back to the ground, or it would all end quickly.
The sounds gave it away.
Thomas didn’t need to look behind him to know the Griever was gaining on him with every passing second.
Pushing off with his feet as strongly as he could, swing by swing, he fled the hideous thing.
Finally , Thomas thought, something went right.
The Griever had altered its course from Alby to head directly for Thomas.
Thomas swung to the right several more times before he dared to look back.
The sounds of his pursuer went on relentlessly, only now with the bone- shuddering addition of cracking and splitting rock joined in.
Like some tree-climbing monkey, Thomas found he could move more quickly than he ever could’ve hoped.
He shuffled his body to the right as far as the plant would let him, then let go and grabbed another one.
This time he grabbed it with both hands and turned to plant the bottom of his feet on the wall.
Before his pendulum swing took him back toward Alby, he reached out for another vine, catching a nice thick one.
Thomas let go of the rope he’d used around his chest and heaved his body to the left, scraping along the wall.
A quick glance below revealed that the Griever had already halved the distance between them, and it was moving faster yet, no more pauses or stops.
It held true, just like all the others.
Wrapping it around his hand, he yanked on it with a sharp tug.
Thomas reached out and grabbed a vine two feet to the left of where he hung.
He had to go to the side.
Down, of course, was only an option if he wanted to die as quickly as possible.
He knew he couldn’t go up—that would bring the Griever across the path of Alby.
Using his left hand to hold tight to the foliage above him, he finished unwrapping himself and prepared to move.
I’m sorry, Alby, he thought as he unraveled the thick vine from his chest.
He knew the only option left was to run.
Thomas felt the last drop of hope drain from his body.
A bright light on the end of one arm pointed directly at Thomas, only this time, the beam didn’t move away.
Its arms shifted about like the legs of the beetle blade, some with sharp picks that drove into the stone of the wall for support.
The Griever’s spikes tore into the stone, throwing shredded ivy and rock chips in every direction.
And then it started to climb the wall.
He wanted to scream at the monster below him: Kill me or go back to your hiding hole!Then, in a sudden burst of light and sound, the Griever came back to life, whirring and clicking.
The ropy plant dug into Thomas’s flesh—his chest felt numb.
Minutes.
Seconds passed.
The anticipation of trying to guess its next move was killing Thomas.
No movement, no light, no sound.
Still, nothing.
A fear he had never known filled him to the point of insanity.
Sweat drenched his hair, his hands, his clothes, everything.
Smell him?
Could it hear him?
He took small breaths through his nose; his pumping heart needed oxygen desperately.
He was blind.
And with no more lights, Thomas couldn’t see a single thing.
It didn’t move, made no sound—even the haunting groans had stopped completely.
It was as if the creature had turned off.
The world turned instantly dark and silent.
Then, without warning, they went out.
The beams of light from the creature shone all over the place, completely random, never settling in one spot.
Thomas wanted to look down so badly, but knew any movement might give him away.
The Griever now sat directly below them.
Thomas held his breath, not daring to make the slightest sound.
whirrrrrrrrrrrrrrrclick-click-clickIt came to a stop, then rolled once more, right up to the wall.
Please!The Griever’s spikes popped out; its body rolled toward Thomas and Alby.
That way.
Go.
Turn.
Please go the other way, Thomas pleaded silently.
It paused by the closed Door that led into the Glade, only a few yards to Thomas’s right.
whirrrrrrrrrrrrrrr click-click-click  whirrrrrrrrrrrrrrrclick-click-clickThomas peeked down without moving his head—the Griever had finally reached the wall where he and Alby hung.
The creature kept coming.
Trying not to think about it, Thomas closed his eyes for a moment and concentrated on remaining still and quiet.
He couldn’t believe people could create something so horrible and send it after kids.
A strong whiff of something burnt stung his nostrils; a sick mixture of overheated engines and charred flesh.
He longed to be back to wherever that was, to run to the mom and dad he hoped still lived, somewhere, missing him, searching for him.
A faint memory tried to escape the locked box within his mind—shadows on the walls when he was a kid, scaring him.
The lights cast eerie shadows across the Maze.
Every time it stopped, the metal arms unfolded and turned this way and that, like a roving robot on an alien planet looking for signs of life.
The Griever rolled and clicked its way closer, zigzagging back and forth, moaning and whirring.
The beetle blade had already revealed his exact position.
But the reality of the situation sank like a stone in his belly.
Just maybe.
Maybe it won’t see us , he thought.
He was sure their only hope was to avoid being noticed.
He fought the fear, forced his body to remain perfectly still, hanging there in the vines.
Seeing it all now—the beast matched with the sounds—Thomas couldn’t think of any nightmare that could equal this hideous thing coming toward him.
But nothing sent chills up and down Thomas’s spine like the haunted, deathly moans that somehow escaped the creature when it sat still, like the sound of dying men on a battlefield.
The spikes and the arms explained the creepy clicking sounds, metal against stone.
When the Griever rolled, it made the metallic whirring sound, like the spinning blade of a saw.
The source of the sounds he’d been hearing made sense now.
Thomas wondered what—or who—could create such frightening, disgusting creatures.
When the creature rolled, these arms folded and maneuvered to avoid being crushed.
One had a three-fingered claw that clasped and unclasped for no apparent reason.
Others had long, menacing needles.
A few had bright lights attached to them.
Several randomly placed mechanical arms stuck out here and there, each one with a different purpose.
But hair and spikes were not the only things protruding from the Griever’s body.
It did this over and over, traveling just a few feet at a time.
Then it would settle, seeming to gather its bearings, the spikes receding back through the moist skin with a sick slurping sound.
Every ten to fifteen seconds, sharp metal spikes popped through its bulbous flesh and the whole creature abruptly curled into a ball and spun forward.
It had no distinguishable head or tail, but front to end it was at least six feet long, four feet thick.
Its body resembled a gigantic slug, sparsely covered in hair and glistening with slime, grotesquely pulsating in and out as it breathed.
Part animal, part machine, the Griever rolled and clicked along the stone pathway.
It looked like an experiment gone terribly wrong—something from a nightmare.
Thomas stared in horror at the monstrous thing making its way down the long corridor of the Maze.
A Griever.
Something unspeakable.
Something he’d seen before, but through the safety of thick glass.
And then something rounded the corner up ahead, and came toward them.
Thomas tried to imitate Alby’s lifeless body, hanging limp in the vines.
Another mechanical squeal screeched through the Maze, close now, followed by the surge of revved machinery.
Thomas sucked in a huge gulp of air, then another, feeling the pinch of the vines tied around his chest.
With a click and then a clack, the beetle turned and scuttled off, disappearing into the ivy.
Long seconds passed, his lungs screaming for air.
Thomas stilled himself, held his breath, hoping that maybe the beetle only detected movement.
He knew it had to be a spy for whoever had sent them here—Alby had told him as much, saying the beetles were how the Creators watched them.
Wicked.
Now it was confirmed: the red light from its eye cast a creepy glow on six capital letters smeared across the torso, as if they had been written with blood:WICKEDThomas couldn’t imagine why that one word would be stamped on the beetle blade, unless for the purpose of announcing to the Gladers that it was evil.
He thought he’d seen it before, back in the Glade when the beetle blade had scooted past him and into the woods.
But then Thomas saw the most chilling part.
The head was impossible to see because of the red beam of light shining right at him, though it seemed small, vision its only purpose, perhaps.
co lizard.
Twelve jointed legs ran along the length of its bottom, spread out, making the thing look like iDocasleeping.
The torso was a silver cylinder, maybe three inches in diameter and ten inches long.
Thomas squinted and tried to focus on the beetle’s body.
The red light of its eye was like a little sun, too bright to look at directly.
He turned and almost screamed out loud— a beetle blade was only a few inches from him, its spindly legs poking through the ivy and somehow sticking to the stone.
A red light to his left, on the wall, caught his attention.
The terrible sounds he’d heard escalate for the last hour took on a high-pitched, mechanical squeal, like a robotic death yell.
A few minutes passed before Thomas saw the first glimmer of light shine off the Maze walls up ahead.
But here, hanging in the ivy, Thomas and Alby would meet their fate.
He had no idea what to expect; he didn’t know if he’d see tomorrow.
Or, at the very least, Thomas hoped he could fight them off from high up, one by one, instead of being overwhelmed on the ground.
He’d known they couldn’t reach the top—he only hoped the Grievers couldn’t or wouldn’t look above them.
Or make their stand.
This was where they’d hide.
He was done.
He couldn’t push Alby up another inch.
He ached with weariness; his muscles screamed.
An exhaustion he’d not known possible filled every tiny particle of his body.
Using his drained, rubbery arms, he turned himself around to face the Maze.
When they’d reached a spot about thirty feet off the ground, Thomas stopped, swaying on the vine he’d tied around his chest.
Still Thomas worked.
The sounds grew louder—the awful, awful sounds.
His feet ached from pressing into the stone cracks.
His hands began to slip and slide on the vines.
The effort was exhausting; Thomas heaved in every breath, felt sweat cover every inch of his skin.
Over and over, little by little, up they went.
The Grievers at least seemed to be moving slowly through the Maze, giving him time.
Climb, wrap, push up, tie off.
Then he repeated the whole process.
He climbed until he was right below the body, wrapped a vine around his own chest for support, then pushed Alby up as far as he could, limb by limb, and tied them off with ivy.
Using the same method of pushing each of Alby’s arms and legs up two or three feet at a time, Thomas slowly made his way up the stone wall.
He got back to work.
The Grievers were getting closer, and it was now obvious that there were more than one.
Thomas thought he saw a couple of red flashes to his left.
Moans.
Buzzes.
Whirrs.
Clangs from the Maze.
Alby hung there, seemingly lifeless, now three feet higher than he’d been five minutes earlier.
He stepped back, panting, to take a look.
When both were secure, Thomas did the same to Alby’s arms—right, then left.
Then the right leg.
First, he pushed the left leg up, then tied a new vine around it.
To test it, he tried raising Alby only a couple of feet, limb by limb.
He climbed back down to the Maze floor, decided to try pushing from below instead of pulling from above.
He couldn’t do it.
He was only able to get it up a few inches before letting go—theweight was too much.
Thomas took hold of the one attached to Alby’s left leg, and pulled.
The four vines tied to Alby below hung tautly around him.
Now came the really hard part.
Relief filled him when the vine held.
Slowly, he let himself sag, letting go with his hands but keeping his feet planted firmly in a large crack.
Once he reached a point a couple of feet above his friend, Thomas wrapped one of the vines around his own chest, around and around several times, snug against his armpits for support.
He couldn’t leave Alby behind.
He began to think how easy it would be without …He refused to finish the thought.
The thick leaves of the ivy served well as handholds, and Thomas was elated to find that the many cracks in the stone wall were perfect supports for his feet as he climbed.
He snatched a vine with both hands and started to climb, directly over the spot where he’d just tied up Alby.
Now it was his turn.
Trying to ignore the doubt that was seeping into his mind about the plan, Thomas continued on.
He worried about the Glader’s circulation getting cut off, but decided it was worth the risk.
Then he took another vine and put it around Alby’s left arm, then both of his legs, tying each one tightly.
After several wraps, he tied the vine off.
The plant would only reach so far, so he had to prop Alby up as much as he could to make it work.
He grabbed one of the vines and wrapped it around Alby’s right arm.
Thomas pushed aside the swelling panic and set himself to work.
They had to be.
The Grievers were close.
He remembered the odd lights he’d observed through the Glade window with Newt.
And the air had brightened ever so slightly; he could make out more of the details of the Maze than he’d been able to just minutes before.
He couldn’t see anything coming, but the sounds were louder—the whirring, the groaning, the clanging.
Thomas, startled, swung around to look, his mind so concentrated on the vines that he’d momentarily shut out the Grievers; he searched all three directions of the Maze.
A sharp crack echoed from within the Maze, followed by the horrible sound of crumpling metal.
Encouraged, he went back to Alby and dragged him over to the vines.
He tested each one, and they all proved to be as strong as the first.
Quickly, Thomas grabbed other vines, ripping them away from the wall, creating a series of climbing ropes.
The vine held.
Then he lifted his feet and hung onto the vine; his body swung forward.
Then again, pulling and relaxing with both hands over and over.
He yanked on it again.
It held.
Hesitant to try, Thomas steeled himself and pulled on the vine of ivy with all his strength.
But the trailing plant had yet to fall free, so Thomas knew it was still attached up there somewhere.
When he’d moved back ten feet, he could no longer see the end of the vine way above; it disappeared in the darkness.
He pulled on it, and with the sound of thick paper ripping apart, the vine came unattached from the wall—more and more as Thomas stepped away from it.
It felt thicker and more solid than he would’ve imagined, maybe a half-inch in diameter.
He reached down and grabbed one of the vines that went all the way to the ground and wrapped his hand around it.
Thomas walked a few feet along the wall until he found a thick growth of ivy covering most of the stone.
It all depended on the unknown abilities of the Grievers, but it was thebest thing he could come up with.
Still …                                               A plan formed in his mind.
Minho hadn’t explained, but he had made it sound as if climbing the walls was impossible.
He thought of the wall, the ivy.
Not only was there the chance of getting lost, he could actually find himself running toward the Grievers instead of away from them.
He could hardly see anything, and he knew, despite what Minho had said, that it’d be stupid to run even if he could carry Alby.
As he looked into the dark recesses of the Maze, he searched his mind for a solution.
Thomas sat back against it himself, panting from exertion, thinking.
Where would he take him, anyway?He pushed and pulled Alby back over to the crack that marked the entrance to the Glade, and propped him once more into a sitting position, leaning against the stone wall.
He couldn’t believe how heavy the boy was, and it took only ten feet or so for Thomas to realize that it just wasn’t going to work.
Trying a new approach, he grabbed Alby’s arms again and started dragging him along the ground.
He didn’t want to meet the source of those lights, those sounds.
Thomas thought he could see bright flashes of light far away, bouncing off the night sky.
The frightening sounds of the Grievers grew closer by the second, echoing off the stone walls of the Maze.
Thomas collapsed forward onto his face; Alby sprawled to the side with a loud flump.
But it was too much.
He pulled the lifeless body onto his back and pushed with his legs, grunting with the effort.
He reached down and grabbed both of Alby’s arms, then squatted into a sitting position and wrapped the arms around his neck from behind.
Even someone as cranky as Alby.
He couldn’t leave a friend to die.
About the Thomas that was before.
And at that moment, in the space of only a few seconds, he learned a lot about himself.
Thomas rocked back on his heels, then ran his arm across his forehead, wiping away the sweat.
buh-bump, buh-bump, buh-bumpStill alive.
He listened at his chest like Minho had done.
Something there.
Kneeling on the ground, Thomas found Alby’s neck, then searched for a pulse.
He turned and faced Alby, still propped against the stone wall, now only a mound of shadow in the darkness.
He had to quit wasting time waiting for them to come and end his life.
How long would he last?Stop, he told himself.
What would they do to him?
Thomas couldn’t begin to guess what was in store for him; he’d seen a Griever, but only a glimpse, and through a dirty window.
And then came the smell—something burning, oily.
The roar of engines interspersed with rolling, cranking sounds like chains hoisting machinery in an old, grimy factory.
How could he do that!The noises grew louder.
How could he leave me here?
Yet of the two of them, Minho had broken down and panicked, only to run off at the first sign of trouble.
Thomas was a Newbie, just a few days in the Glade, a few minutes in the Maze.
Minho was a veteran in this place, a Runner.
A sudden dislike for the guy swelled up inside him.
Thomas stared at the spot where Minho had vanished.
Don’t stop moving!"And then he turned and ran, disappearing in seconds, swallowed by the Maze and darkness.
Just keep moving.
"We have to split up—it’s our only chance.
But when he spoke, Thomas imagined his eyes wide with terror.
Minho stood, his face barely visible in the dying light.
All of it, together, was horrifying, and the small amount of courage Thomas had gathered began to slip away.
A hollow moan filled the air, and then something that sounded like the clanking of chains.
Thomas thought of long fingernails tapping against glass.
It grew louder by the second, and then a series of eerie clicks joined in.
A constant whirring that had a metallic ring every few seconds, like sharp knives rubbing against each other.
It came from deep within the Maze, a low, haunting sound.
Thomas felt his own breath quicken.
Minho’s head popped up; he looked down one of the darkened stone corridors.
Something!He opened his mouth to speak, but closed it quickly when he heard the noise.
"Thomas wanted to say something, tell him to grow up, tell him to think, tell him to explain everything he knew.
Not like this.
"I’ve never been this scared before, dude.
"Ah, man, oh man," Minho whispered, then crumpled to the ground, burying his face in clenched fists.
Thomas straightened his clothes defiantly.
Slowly, he let go and backed away.
Minho looked down at his hands clasped to Thomas’s shirt and shame washed across his face.
He was giving up too easily.
Dead!"Thomas didn’t know which he felt more strongly at that moment—anger at Minho or pity for him.
We’re dead, you hear me?
You don’t know anything, and you’re just making it worse by trying to have hope!
"You don’t understand, shuck-face!
Why don’t you quit moping at every word I say and talk to me?"Minho abruptly jumped at Thomas and grabbed him by the shirt.
"I’m just trying to help, man.
You really think we’ve never had the ingenious thought of climbing the freaking walls?"For the first time, Thomas felt anger creeping in to compete with his fear and panic.
"I swear, Greenie, you must think we’re a bunch of idiots.
"The vines—can’t we climb them?"Minho let out a frustrated sigh.
"Can’t we climb this thing?" He looked at Minho, who didn’t say a word.
Thomas looked up at the enormous walls covered in thick vines—desperation had finally clicked him into problem-solving mode.
" He didn’t elaborate, and his face said he didn’t plan to.
"Yeah, needles.
""Needles?" Things just kept sounding more and more disturbing to Thomas.
"But I’m sure it and a whole bunch of them suckers’ll be here soon to finish us off with their needles.
" Minho looked back into the Maze, which was now almost completely dark with nighttime.
It went nuts and stung Alby, but then ran away.
"There was no they , just the one we thought was dead.
He couldn’t tell if Minho had beenserious.
"  "They …," Thomas began, but didn’t know how to finish.
"Maybe it did—maybe I’ll collapse any second.
"Well, why didn’t the thing prick you?" Minho held his hands out.
"Thomas pointed at Minho’s arms, then his legs.
What does that mean?""Dude, you just have to see them to know what I’m talking about.
"Prick you?
For some reason, Thomas thought the word prick sounded a lot worse than bite.
" Minho folded his arms and leaned against the wall.
There could be dozens all over his body.
And no, you can’t see it.
They prick you.
"Can you see it?""They don’t freaking bite you.
"Where was he bitten?" Thomas asked.
Alby’s chest rose and fell with struggled breaths, but his skin was drenched in sweat; he looked like he wouldn’t last much longer.
They half carried, half dragged the almost-lifeless body a hundred feet or so to the vertical crack of the Door, where Minho propped Alby up against the wall in a semi-sitting position.
"Wincing at the growing cramps in his gut, Thomas walked over and lifted Alby’s feet as he was told.
Now come on, grab his legs.
You should’ve followed the rules and stayed inside.
"Quit your crying.
He felt close to losing it once and for all.
"How can this be happening!" he screamed to the walls, turning in a circle.
"Thomas couldn’t believe how morbid a statement that was.
Give ’em one body that’s easy to find in the morning.
We gotta carry him over to the Door.
"Grab those smelly suckers.
"Minho stood and grabbed Alby’s arms, then nodded toward his feet.
Nothing kills happy time more than being reminded of your slaughtered friends every day.
"That freaking graveyard’s back in the woods for a reason.
" Minho pointed absently back toward the sealed-off Glade.
There are more whose bodies never showed up.
"Well, those are just the ones we found.
" So that’s how they died, he thought.
Haven’t you been to the graveyard?""Yeah.
"At least twelve.
He was clearly exhausted, almost in a daze.
"How many have died, then?"Minho stared at the ground, crouched with one forearm on a knee.
"Thomas scowled, wishing he could find one little spark of hope.
"Has anyone ever been caught outside the walls at night and lived through it?""Never.
"Thomas wouldn’t allow himself to give in to Minho’s hopelessness—he didn’t want to give up and die just yet.
That doesn’t mean they never show up during the day.
They always come out at night.
""Then you were wrong, shank.
"But I thought the Grievers only came out at night.
"Thomas wondered about the mention of a serum, but had too many other questions to get out first.
Made it back and got the Serum.
They made it back before sunset, you dong.
"Didn’t you hear me?
And Gally, and others who’ve been stung and survived?"Minho glanced up at him with a look that said he was dumber than cow klunk.
"But … what about Ben?
"A thought sprang into Thomas’s mind, giving him hope.
How many Grievers’ll come at us?" He peered down the corridor that led deeper into the Maze, as if expecting the creatures to arrive then, summoned by the sound of their name.
co we can do.
"Oh, come on—there has to be siDocmething.
" Thomas was annoyed at Minho’s constant negativity.
"You’re telling me we have no chance?""None.
"We’re really going to die?" he asked, unable to accept it.
But fast enough, the dire reality of the situation began to hit Thomas, and his insides turned to rot.
" He said it so matter-of-factly, Thomas could hardly process the meaning of the words.
Yep, we’ll all be nice and dead soon.
Course, we’ll be dead, too, so don’t get all weepy for him.
Could be dead in an hour—I don’t know how long it takes if you don’t get the Serum.
"Since we didn’t make it back before sunset, probably.
"Is he going to die?" he forced himself to say, cringing at how shallow and empty it sounded.
He knew he had a lot to learn—that was why he was asking questions.
Thomas wanted to scream.
Is he going through the Changing?""You’ve got a lot to learn" was all Minho would say.
Stung, whatever?
"So he was … bitten?
"This statement took Thomas by surprise.
"Let’s just say the Grievers can play dead really well.
"Don’t wanna talk about it," Minho said as he checked Alby’s pulse and bent over to listen to his chest.
"What happened?" he asked, trying to put aside his anger.
Hopelessness rained down on Thomas.
His usually dark skin was losing color fast and his breaths were quick and shallow.
Alby looked on the edge of death.
Thomas took a closer look at the collapsed boy and realized just how bad things were.
Minho forced a bitter laugh, then knelt back on the ground beside Alby.
" Thomas felt like kicking him in the face.
I was just trying to help.
""You’re welcome.
Break the Number One Rule, kill yourself, whatever.
"Whatever, dude.
""And what good are you with us?" Minho rolled his eyes.
"I couldn’t just sit there and leave you guys out here.
"Thomas felt his face heat up—he’d expected at least a little gratitude.
You’re as good as dead, just like us.
You’re the shuckiest shuck-faced shuck there ever was.
Had Alby been attacked by a Griever?"Greenie," Minho said, "if you think that was brave comin’ out here, listen up.
Thomas shuddered.
Alby, on the ground, looked worse, his clothes ripped, his arms covered with cuts and bruises.
Minho had pulled himself up and was standing once again, but he looked terrible, even in the pale light still available—sweaty, dirty, scratched-up.
Thomas pushed himself away from the wall and ran to the two Gladers.
Then a sharp cry from Alby up ahead snapped Thomas to attention; Minho was moaning.
Filled with terror at what the consequences might be.
Thomas leaned back against the rough rock, overcome by disbelief at what he had just done.
Twilight had fallen, and the mammoth walls looked like enormous tombstones in a weed-infested cemetery for giants.
A thick silence followed the thunderous rumble of the Door closing, and a veil of darkness seemed to cover the sky, as if even the sun had been frightened away by what lurked in the Maze.
For several seconds, Thomas felt like the world had frozen in place.
The walls slammed shut behind him, the echo of its boom bouncing off the ivy-covered stone like mad laughter.
He squeezed past the connecting rods at the last second and stepped into the Maze.
Forward.
He moved.
Thomas knew he had no choice.
Two.
Three.
Four feet.
Five feet.
The crunching, grinding sound of the Doors filled the air, deafening.
Don’t you bloody do it!"The rods on the right wall seemed to reach like stretched-out arms for their home, grasping for those little holes that would serve as their resting place for the night.
"Don’t do it, Tommy!
Thomas heard Newt scream something from behind him.
That was it.
Time was up.
They weren’t going to make it.
Minho stumbled up ahead, fell to the ground.
Only a few feet more and it’d be over.
He looked back into the Maze, at the closing wall.
Thomas turned to look at Newt: limping along as well as he could, he’d only made it halfway to Thomas.
No chance at all.
They had no chance of making it in time.
There were only seconds left until it shut completely.
The right wall was closing fast, seeming to quicken its pace the more Thomas willed it to slow down.
But they were still a hundred feet away.
Thomas watched as Minho tried desperately to get him back on his feet, then, finally giving up, started to drag the boy across the stone floor by the arms.
Alby had slipped out of Minho’s clutches and fallen to the ground.
Thomas turned to look back into the Maze and dread washed through him.
Newt had already made it back to the Homestead, but at Thomas’s cry he immediately spun around and broke into a stuttering run toward the Door.
I can see ’em!" He knew he should run into the Maze and help, but the rule about notleaving the Glade was seared into his mind.
"They’re coming!
"Newt!" he finally screamed, forcing his gaze away from Minho and Alby to face the other direction.
Thomas was so stunned by the turn of events, it took a moment for him to act.
Every step he took seemed like it could be his last.
"They got him!" Minho shouted, his voice strangled and weak with exhaustion.
Minho looked up, saw Thomas, who knew his eyes must be bulging out of his head.
His eyes finally focused through the initial blindness of fear, and he realized it was Minho, with one of Alby’s arms draped across his shoulders, practically dragging the boy along behind him.
But then two forms took shape, stumbling along the alley toward the Door.
At first, a shot of panic raced through him; he stepped back, worried it might be a Griever.
Something stirred inside the Maze, down the long corridor in front of him.
Then a flicker of movement to the left caught his eyes.
It seemed impossible.
Once again, Thomas looked in awe at the massive moving wall—it defied any sense of physics.
The vertical row of connecting rods, so many they seemed to reach the sky far above, slid toward their corresponding holes on the left wall, ready to seal shut until the morning.
The right wall rumbled across the ground, spitting dirt and rocks as it moved.
The Doors were closing for the night.
Then came the crunching, grinding sound of stone against stone.
A loud boom sounded from all directions, startling Thomas out of his thoughts.
But his chest ached at the thought of them out there, killed by the horrendous creature he’d seen through the window his first morning in the Glade.
He barely knew Alby and Minho.
Thomas shook his head and looked back into the Maze.
Then he walked away, hunched over, quiet.
"The Doors close in two minutes," Newt said, a statement so succinct and final it seemed to hang in the air like a burial shroud caught in a puff of wind.
The growing darkness of twilight was a perfect fit for how grim things felt to Thomas.
Tears moistened Newt’s eyes, and Thomas was sure that even within the dark chamber of memories that were locked away, out of his reach, he’d never seen someone look so sad.
"He put his hand on Thomas’s shoulder, then let it slump to his side.
We can’t afford to make things bloody worse than they already are.
"That’s why we can’t go out.
"The shank’s right," Newt said solemnly.
The situation had become so grave he didn’t know how to react, felt a pit of emptiness in his heart.
Dead?
"Newt said nothing, and Chuck turned and walked back toward the Homestead, his head hanging low.
They’re dead.
Impossible.
Minho’s too smart to get lost.
If they’re not back, it means they’re dead.
"Newt won’t say it," the boy said, "so I will.
"Thomas looked over at Chuck, who seemed as pale-faced as Newt.
No matter what.
Never go out at night.
You, too, when you go to your first Gathering and get chosen by a Keeper.
Like we all did.
"Both of ’em swore an oath, just like I did.
If those shanks don’t make it back …" He paused, seeming hesitant to say what everyone was thinking.
We’d just be throwin’ more lives away.
Going out there at night is beggin’ for death.
"You don’t get it yet, Tommy.
Newt’s face softened.
I didn’t mean …" Thomas didn’t know what to say—he was just trying to help.
You think I wouldn’t risk my life in a second to save those lugs?""No … I … Sorry.
"Not a bloody week you’ve been here!
"Shut your hole, Greenie!" he yelled.
Shouldn’t we do something?"Newt turned on him, his face flushed red, his eyes flamed with fury.
co if they stay out there?
"Won’t the GrieversiDocgetthem.
" "But why?" Thomas persisted, in disbelief at Newt’s stubbornness.
Especially with the buggin’ Doors about to close.
One hundred percent against the rules.
Don’t say it again.
Okay?
"We can’t.
"Bloody he—" Newt started before stopping himself; he closed his eyes for a second and took a deep breath.
It seemed so stupid to sit here and worry themselves to death when they could go out there and find them.
"Why don’t we send out a search party?" he suggested again.
Thomas was touched that Newt cared so much about Alby and Minho—as if they were his own kin.
"Where are they?" Newt said, his voice thin and strained.
He looked up as Thomas and Chuck approached.
They found Newt at the West Door, pacing, running his hands through his hair.
Not surprisingly, Chuck was right behind him.
" He stood up and headed out to look.
"I’m going over to watch the Doors with Newt.
"I can’t stand sitting here while they’re out there missing," he said as he dropped his fork on the plate.
He’d only been able to eat a few bites when he couldn’t take it anymore.
Thomas reluctantly followed orders like the rest of the boys and was sharing a picnic table on the south side of the Homestead with Chuck and Winston.
No one said it, but Thomas knew it wouldn’t be long before the Doors closed.
Newt forced the Gladers to go on and get some of Frypan’s hard-earned dinner, but he insisted on standing watch for the missing duo.
But Alby and Minho never showed up.
The Runners had returned at their normal time, and Thomas had grown more and more upset as he watched Newt run from Door to Door as they entered the Glade, not bothering to hide his panic.
But tonight, the Gladers ate like dead men resurrected for one last meal before being sent to live with the devil.
Everyone gobbled up his food and usually begged for more.
Thomas was quickly learning that jokes about Frypan’s cooking were just that—jokes.
Frypan and his cooks served up a grand meal of steak, mashed potatoes, green beans and hot rolls.
That night dinner proved to be a somber affair, and it had nothing to do with the food.
Thomas tried not to think about it as he put his focus back on yanking weeds.
Whatever had happened to him out there—maybe even related to his lingering ankle injury—had been truly awful.
Newt was terrified of the Maze.
It gradually passed, and he’d explained that sending out search parties was forbidden, lest even more people be lost, but there was no mistaking the fear that had crossed his face.
When Thomas asked why Newt and some others didn’t just go into the Maze and search for their friends, Newt’s expression had changed to outright horror—his cheeks had shrunk into his face, becoming sallow and dark.
He’d never forget the next look that had come over Newt’s face.
When Chuck offered up that maybe they were just exploring and having some fun, Newt had given him a stare so harsh Thomas thought Chuck might spontaneously combust.
No wonder he’d looked so upset.
Newt had said they were supposed to have come back by noon, just enough time for them to get to the dead Griever, explore for an hour or two, then return.
He glanced constantly at the West Door, looking for any sign of Alby and Minho, Newt’s concern having rubbed off on him.
co until he’d be done with the Gardens.
" Before Thomas knew it he was back at work, pulling up weeds again, counting down theiDocmnutes.
"They should’ve come back hours ago.
"Alby and Minho," he muttered.
Newt’s eyes narrowed as he looked out toward one of the entrances to the Maze.
Thomas leaned forward, so curious he was able to put the girl out of his mind.
" "Then what does?" Chuck asked.
But that’s not what really has me buggin’.
"Shuck it.
Newt let out a long sigh.
As if he knew her.
Concerned for her welfare.
It tasted sour now—he realized he was worried about the girl.
"Thomas looked down at his apple, then took a bite.
I’m tellin’ ya, something’s very bad about that whole bloody thing.
Medjacks’re doing their best to feed her, but she’s eatin’ less each time.
Keeps groanin’ and saying all kinds of weird stuff, but won’t wake up.
"The girl from the Box.
Thomas almost pushed him with another question, but Newt finally continued.
""Every lovin’ thing in the universe," he replied, then fell silent as he stared off into space for a long moment.
"No offense, but you look like klunk.
"What is wrong with you?" Chuck asked.
"Thomas felt like he’d been caught stealing, but he was genuinely concerned—Newt was one of the few people in the Glade he actually liked.
"No wonder people hate sleepin’ next to you shanks.
""I can hear every bloody word you guys are saying," Newt called in a loud voice.
"Why don’t you go ask him.
""I don’t know," Thomas replied.
"Looks like you did when you popped out of the Box.
"What’s wrong with him?" the boy whispered.
Chuck noticed and asked the question that was on Thomas’s mind.
Thomas watched as Newt chewed his fingernails, something he hadn’t seen the older boy do before.
His eyes were bloodshot, his forehead creased with heavy lines.
Newt was there, too, but sat alone, ignoring everybody.
He bit into an apple, then plopped on the ground beside Chuck.
Even pig was starting to sound good again.
He could’ve eaten a full-blown meal despite having had lunch just two hours earlier.
Tired and sore, he headed to the Kitchen for a snack and some water.
Just as strong were thoughts of the girl, but he pushed them aside as much as possible.
But even though he didn’t understand it, or where it came from, the desire was undeniable.
Once again he thought about how absurd it was that he wanted it so badly.
Just let me be a Runner.
Runner, he thought as he went on break.
Two strikes.
Blood House, Gardens.
By the time midafternoon arrived, Thomas was ready to collapse from exhaustion—all that bending over and crawling around on your knees in the dirt was the pits.
And he did.
Just work, he thought.
He drew a deep, long breath.
His new life pretty much sucked.
For some reason the girl had popped into his head again, out of the blue, and then thoughts of Ben, and the dead Griever, which should have been a good thing but everyone acted as if it were anything but.
And here was Zart, who seemed perfectly wiDocllng.
.
Butco suddenly Thomas didn’t feel like talking anymore.
Chuck and everyone else around the Glade never wanted to give him the answers to anything.
Lots more.
Thomas had more questions.
" He snickered, the first time Thomas had heard him do so— there was something very likable about it.
Have fun that day, brother.
Everyone just likes to call ’em Baggers.
They act as guards and poh-lice, too.
I know they take care of dead people, but it can’t happen that often, can it?""Those are the creepy fellas.
"What about the Baggers?
Anyone tell you that?"Thomas ignored the question and moved on, determined to get as many answers as possible.
Actually, a lot of Gladers have more than one job.
During off times they do other stuff round the Glade.
Trenching and whatnot.
"They’re the ones take care of all the heavy stuff for the Gardens.
Zart cleared his throat and kept on working as he answered.
"What about the Track-hoes?" Thomas asked as he yanked out a huge weed, clumps of dirt swaying on the roots.
Yeah, he was a little excitable and talked too much, but Thomas was glad enough to have him around.
The kid tried so hard to be everyone’s friend, but no one seemed to like him or even pay attention to him.
"Thomas felt a pang of guilt over Chuck—felt sorry for him.
Spend one day with them suckers— that’ll cure any thoughts of goin’ that direction, I can tell ya that.
Clean toilets, clean the showers, clean the kitchen, clean up the Blood House after a slaughter, everything.
"That’s what the shanks do that can’t do nothin’ else.
Refused to talk about it.
"What’s a Slopper?" He knew that was what Chuck did, but the boy never wanted to talk about it.
"Most of the words were self-explanatory, but Thomas wondered about a couple of them.
Pretty much keep to myself and my own stuff.
I don’t know, a few more, maybe.
The Runners, of course.
"And what are the job options?""Well, you got the Builders, the Sloppers, Baggers, Cooks, Map-makers, Med-jacks, Track-Hoes, Blood Housers.
"Yeah, Greenie, what you want?""How many Keepers total are there?" Thomas asked, trying to act casual.
The kid had droopy eyes and a long face —for some reason he looked as bored as humanly possible.
The Keeper glanced up at him, then resumed his work.
"So, Zart," he said.
This Keeper seemed a lot more approachable.
Thomas and Zart were weeding a long row of young corn when Thomas decided it was a good time to start asking questions.
He didn’t love it, and mostly ignored the other boys working alongside him, but he didn’t hate it nearly as much as what he’d done for Winston at the Blood House.
Weeding, pruning an apricot tree, planting squash and zucchini seeds, picking veggies.
He didn’t say much, but showed Thomas the ropes until he could start working on his own.
Zart was the tall, black-haired kid who’d stood at the front of the pole during Ben’s Banishment, and who for some odd reason smelled like sour milk.
Thomas spent the morning with the Keeper of the Gardens, "working his butt off," as Newt would’ve said.
He obviously didn’t have a clue.
He waited for Newt to answer, but nothing came.
"Well, then who killed the stupid thing?"Excellent question, Thomas thought.
"Chuck absently tapped his fork against the table for a few seconds.
"Thanks for that bit of news.
"Well, they found a dead Griever, right?" "Yeah," Newt replied.
"And what’s your bloody question?" Chuck seemed deep in thought.
""Yeah, Chuckie?" Newt asked, somewhat sarcastically.
"I’ve got a question about that.
A small piece of bacon flew out of his mouth when he spoke.
""Hey," Chuck said.
"Just seein’ off Minho and Alby—they’re going to look at the buggin’ dead Griever.
Newt shrugged as he dug into his eggs.
New developments in the Glade had just become a part of life.
"What’s going on?" Thomas asked, surprising himself at how nonchalantly he said it.
co a large group of Gladers got up and ran toward the West Door, talking excitedly about something.
He and Newt had just joined Chuck for breakfast at a picnic table right outside the KitiDochenwhen.
He made a mental note to watch out for nasty black hairs in his meals.
Didn’t seem like the most sanitary guy in the world to oversee all the cooking, Thomas thought.
He couldn’t have been more than sixteen years old, but he had a full beard and hair sticking out all over the rest of his body, as if each follicle were trying to escape the confines of his food-smeared clothes.
The guy was too busy trying to feed breakfast to an army of starving Gladers.
"That morning, Thomas finally met the infamous Frypan, if only from a distance.
And hope we don’t bloody choke.
""Come on, let’s get us some grub from Frypan.
"Deal.
Thomas finally nodded.
"Newt raised his eyebrows.
"That’s a sucky deal.
Deal?"Thomas hated the idea of waiting, not knowing how long it might be.
Don’t keep your trap shut, and I’ll bloody make sure ya never see it happen.
"You keep your mouth shut about it, and I’ll put you on the list of potential trainees as soon as you show some clout.
" "What?" Thomas felt his hopes rise.
"Let’s make a deal.
Newt slapped him on the back.
"Yeah" was all he said.
He knew it was time to shut up.
"The stubbornness washed out of Thomas.
Last thing we need is you screwin’ that up.
Order’s the reason we put Ben out—can’t very well have loonies runnin’ around tryin’ to kill people, now can we?
Reason we’re all sane around here is ’cause we work our butts off and maintain order.
You say that bloody word over and over in your shuck head.
"Order.
"Order," Newt continued.
"He paused, but Thomas said nothing, dreading the lecture he knew was coming.
That’s not how it works around here, and our whole existence depends on things working.
"You better stop this nonsense, before others hear about it.
He rolled his eyes, but then nodded.
You listenin’ all nice and pretty?"Thomas surprisingly didn’t feel that intimidated.
"You listen to me, Greenie.
"Newt stood to join Thomas and jabbed a finger in his face.
It’s a waste of time to make me wait.
""For all you guys know, I could be really good at it.
The Gathering elects Runners, and if you think I’m tough, they’d laugh in your face.
""Good try, ya buggin’ shank.
"Fine, I’ll talk to Minho about it.
He decided on another direction.
"Making enemies was the last thing Thomas wanted, but still.
Drop it for now.
Start stompin’ around this place yappin’ about how you’re too good to work like a peasant, how you’re all nice and ready to be a Runner—you’ll make plenty of enemies.
"But—""Listen, trust me on this, Tommy.
"Thomas felt a surge of impatience.
But give it a rest for now.
"No one said you couldn’t.
"Newt still sat there, staring up at Thomas, not offering to help.
I can do it.
I don’t have a clue what I did before they shipped me here in that metal box, but my gut tells me that being a Runner is what I’m supposed to do.
dayco —I’ll go nuts.
I can’t pull weedsiDocall.
"Newt, I mean it.
" Thomas stood and started folding up his sleeping gear.
Got a lot of provin’ to do before we’ll recommend you to the Keeper.
No one’s ever become a Runner in their first month, much less their first week.
Forget it.
"So am I.
Newt didn’t break his gaze.
In fact, the desire to become a Runner was the only thing driving him on, helping him accept his predicament.
" It barely made sense even to Thomas, but he felt it deeply.
Little early for death wishes, don’t ya think?""I’m serious.
"Haven’t been here a week, shank.
"Newt turned and looked him in the eye.
"I want to be a Runner.
Thomas hesitated, thinking, scared to say it out loud again.
"Why all the interest?" Newt asked.
Felt it all over.
But he still felt it.
Especially after last night.
"Thomas frowned, not quite understanding the drive inside him, urging him on.
No room or time for dummies or brats.
A normal maze’d be hard enough—but when it changes every night, couple of mental mistakes and you’re spendin’ the night with vicious beasts.
Worst part, you’re always scared you might not make it back.
Worryin’ about the bloody Maps.
Maze pattern different every day, tryin’ to picture things in your mind, tryin’ to get us out of here.
Stress.
"Pressure.
""Then why is it so terrible out there?" What else didn’t he know about?Newt sighed.
"Yeah, usually.
" Destiny or not, Thomas didn’t want to run into one of those things.
""I thought the Grievers only came out at night.
I don’t miss it.
"It’s bloody awful out there, ya know?
" Newt straightened his legs and leaned back on his hands.
Can’t be reckless, can’t be timid, either.
Gotta be a decision maker, know the right amount of risk to take.
To survive the buggin’ Maze, you gotta be smart, quick, strong.
"What do you mean?""When I say best of the best, I mean at everything.
"This piqued Thomas’s interest.
A very small part, actually.
How fast you can bloody run is only part of it.
"Show me some smarts, Greenie, Tommy, whatever ya like.
Test everybody to see how fast they are?"Newt gave Thomas a disgusted look, then groaned.
""So what do you do?
""Like I said, best of the best.
"Okay, I’m listening.
This made Thomas even more curious, though he was just fine going back to the subject of Runners.
" Newt’s tone warned that the conversation about the Changing was over.
But I thought you wanted to talk about the Runners.
Does everyone go psycho like Ben and start trying to kill people?""Ben was way worse than most.
What changes?
"What is that, anyway?
It was the one topic that Thomas thought might lead him to answers more than anything else.
"The Changing.
"Still gives me the chills thinkin’ I might have gone through the Changing.
Almost got me.
"Runnin’ from the buggin’ Grievers, what else?
"How’d you do it?" Thomas asked, thinking the more he could get Newt to talk, the more he’d learn.
co physical pain he still felt.
The look made Thomas think it was more from the memory, not iDocanyatual.
" He reached down and rubbed his right ankle absently, a brief look of pain flashing across his face.
Hasn’t been the bloody same since.
"Was till I hurt my leg few months back.
"Why aren’t you one?"Newt’s gaze returned to Thomas, sharply.
" He picked up a loose rock and tossed it, watching it absently as it bounced to a stop.
Everything depends on them.
Have to be.
"Best of the best, those guys.
"Newt gave him a suspicious look.
Why?" "Just wondering.
"The Runners?
Newt had paused, looking confused.
Becoming a Runner just felt like something he was born to do.
The pull to know was strong, and he didn’t quite understand why.
Even after what he’d seen last night, even after witnessing the Griever through the window, he wanted to know.
But he remained still, despite an odd urge to apologize and change the subject; he wanted to know everything about them.
The words seemed to pop out of nowhere.
"So tell me about the Runners," Thomas said suddenly.
More likely he didn’t want to talk about it.
"What do they do with people when they catch them?" Did he really want to know?Newt just shrugged, his indifference not very convincing.
"Thomas had to agree.
Gives me the willies like nothin’ else.
But every buggin’ time, the Grievers leave the collar on our doorstep.
All as nasty as the one you peeped on last night.
"What the—""Only seen three Banishments, Tommy.
How could Minho act so nonchalant about it all?
Thomas turned back to Newt, confused.
Minho seemed to think nothing of it, throwing it to one of the other Runners, who went and put it back in the tool shed near the Gardens.
It was the section of pole with the leather collar attached to it.
Then Thomas watched as he walked over and picked something up.
Instead, he saw Minho stretching.
He looked toward the East Door, almost expecting to see Ben standing there on the other side.
So—" But before he could finish his sentence the rumble of the walls opening for the day cut him off.
"So why’d you come wake me up?""What, don’t like seein’ my face first thing on the wake-up?""Not especially.
The subject only made him sick and guilty, so he moved on to something else.
"Thomas didn’t say anything to that, hoping that somehow he could go through the entire day without talking about Ben and the Banishment.
He’s the big one that stood in front last night.
Nice guy, s’long as you don’t sluff on the job, that is.
"Who’s the Keeper?""Zart.
"Thomas nodded in that direction.
"What’s a Track-hoe?""It’s what we call the guys workin’ their butts off in the Gardens—tilling, weeding, planting and such.
"Burn me—you grew some right nice-sized eggs over night, now didn’t ya?"Thomas ignored him and moved on.
Newt leaned back, eyebrows raised.
cow her name.
I don’t eveniDockn.
That doesn’t make sense , he thought.
A sadness washed over him, as if he missed her, wanted to see her.
" Thoughts of the girl crashed around his mind, made him remember the connection he felt.
Call her Greenie—my name’s Thomas.
The girl in the coma is.
I’m not really the newest Newbie anymore, right?
"No, Greenie.
"Aren’t you supposed to quit calling me that?" "What, bloody piggies?"Thomas forced a laugh and shook his head.
"Thomas was sick of being treated like a baby.
See if that suits your fancy more than slicin’ up bloody piggies and such.
"Gonna put ya with the Track-hoes today, Greenie.
He sat quietly for a few moments, looking out at all the hustle -bustle starting to whip up across the Glade.
" Newt plopped down beside Thomas and folded his legs up under himself.
"Uh … yeah, now that ya mention it.
Once again his memory wipe baffled him.
What are you guys, a bunch of farmers?" Farmers—how did he remember so much about them?
"Sleep in?
"Thomas rolled into a sitting position, hating that he couldn’t just lie there for another few hours.
"Figured I’d let ya sleep in after such a rough couple days.
What time is it?""Seven o’clock, Greenie," Newt said with a mocking smile.
""Yeah, good morning to you, too.
"Get up, ya lug.
Someone tapped his shoulder and he opened his eyes to see Newt staring down at him.
It didn’t last a minute.
Giving up, he lay back down, hoping no one would bother him.
He sat up, rubbing his eyes, trying to shake the heavy grogginess.
The next morning, dawn had barely touched the sky before the working sounds of the Glade wakened Thomas from the deepest slumber since he’d arrived.
But, inexplicably, it still called to him.
The more he thought about it, being a Runner didn’t sound like such a great idea.
Thomas shuddered and rolled over on his side.
That poor, poor guy.
That poor guy, he thought.
Somehow Ben had already been stung once, which meant he knew better than perhaps anyone just exactly what lay in store for him.
Thomas couldn’t imagine going out that way, but based on Ben’s last moments, psychotically thrashing and spitting and screaming, he no longer doubted the importance of the Glade rule that no one should enter the Maze except Runners, and then only during the day.
Though he had plenty of reasons to despise Ben, he mostly felt sorry for him.
But now he was gone, Banished to the world of the Grievers, taken to wherever they took their prey, victim to whatever was done there.
Deep down he knew that Ben was only part of his many problems.
Thomas could almost convince himself he’d be completely content, happy and excited to learn his new life, aim for his goal of being a Runner.
How different would things be right now if it weren’t for that one boy?
For the second night in a row, Thomas went to bed with the haunted image of Ben’s face burned into his mind, tormenting him.
Thomas squeezed his eyes shut and was surprised to feel tears trickling down his cheeks.
Ben’s final screams were cut off when the walls closed with a terrible boom.
At the last second, the front Keeper somehow loosened the larger pole from the piece attached to Ben and yanked it back into the Glade, leaving the boy to his Banishment.
It was a bestial, lunatic cry, surely ripping the boy’s vocal cords to shreds.
Ben screamed then, without pause, a sound so piercing that Thomas covered his ears.
"Hold!" Alby shouted.
He looked as alien as anything Thomas could imagine.
Thomas couldn’t believe he was still looking upon a human being—the madness in Ben’s eyes, the phlegm flying from his mouth, the pale skin stretched taut across his veins and bones.
With one last violent effort, Ben was finally able to twist his neck in the circle of leather so that his whole body turned to face the Gladers.
The walls of the Door were only seconds from sealing shut.
Soon he was fully four feet outside the Glade, jerking his body from side to side as he tried to escape his collar.
He tried to plant his feet at the threshold, but it only lasted for a split second; the pole sent him into the Maze with a lurch.
"Noooo!" he screamed again, and then again.
But the combined strength of the Keepers was way too much, forcing the condemned boy closer and closer to the edge of the Glade, just as the right wall was almost there.
"Noooooooooo!" Ben screamed, spit flying from his mouth as he thrashed about, tearing at the collar with his hands.
He fell to his knees, only to be jerked back to his feet by the Keeper in front, a thick guy with black hair and a snarl on his face.
A strangling cry erupted from Ben’s throat, louder than the sounds of the closing Door.
Ben’s head snapped back as he was jerked forward, the Keepers pushing the pole toward the Maze outside the Glade.
"Keepers, now!" Alby shouted.
The ground shook beneath them, and Thomas didn’t know if he could watch what he knew was going to happen next.
Sparks flew from the stone as the massive right wall slid to the left, groaning thunderously as it made its journey to close off the Glade from the Maze for the night.
Pllllleeeeeee—"His shrill cry was cut off by the rumbling crack of the East Door beginning to close.
I swear I’ll never do it again!
"I swear I’ll do anything!
""No, no, no, no, no," Ben was saying, half under his breath.
Keepers, get ready.
"If we let shanks like you get away with that stuff," Alby said, "we never would’ve survived this long.
I can’t look into those eyes again, he thought.
Thomas quickly stepped behind a taller boy to avoid his own confrontation with Ben.
Without fail, everyone looked away.
co.
Please!" He glanced from boy to boy, begging withiDochseyes.
Help me!
"Someone stop them!
But Ben ignored him, pleading for help as he started to pull on the leather looped around his neck.
You can’t do this to me!""Shut up!" Alby roared from behind.
Somebody, help me!
"Pllllleeeeeeeeease!
Just be over!"Please," Ben said, his voice rising in desperation.
Just end, he screamed in his head.
Would Thomas spend the rest of his days feeling responsible?
Couldn’t something be done for him?
Why did he deserve this fate?
Something was obviously wrong with Ben.
Thomas’s feelings changed again.
He was looking left and right, though the collar around his neck prevented him from seeing the pole and Keepers behind him.
The only sounds were the muffled sobs of Ben, who kept wiping at his nose and eyes.
Once they were all in place—ten Keepers spaced evenly apart between Alby and Ben—the air grew still and silent.
Winston the Butcher also took up a position.
Newt was one of them, as was Minho, confirming Thomas’s guess that he was the Keeper of the Runners.
One by one, boys were stepping out of the crowd and walking over to the long pole; they grabbed it with both hands, gripped it as if readying for a tug -of-war match.
More than anything, he just wanted Ben gone, wanted it all to be over.
His guilt transformed into anger and blame.
Being the center of attention again could only bring more suspicion about him.
"Thomas hated that his link to Ben was being made public—hated the responsibility he felt.
"Keepers, take your place on the Banishment Pole.
" A long pause.
And you ain’t coming back.
The Keepers have spoken, and their word ain’t changing.
"Ben of the Builders, you’ve been sentenced to Banishment for the attempted murder of Thomas the Newbie.
Alby spoke in a loud, almost ceremonious voice, looking at no one and everyone at the same time.
Even from where Thomas was standing, it looked surprisingly strong.
The shaft of aluminum bowed in the middle, but only a little.
And it was an odd sight on the other side: Ben, trembling, crying, a roughly cut collar of old leather wrapped around his pale, scrawny neck, attached to a long pole that stretched from him to Alby, twenty feet away.
Eyes bloodshot, face wrinkled in anger, breathing heavily—to Thomas, he suddenly looked evil.
When he reached the end, he gripped it tightly and turned to face the crowd.
He walked past Ben and along the pole, picking it up off the ground as he slid its length through his palm and fingers.
Alby didn’t respond to Ben; he pulled on the collar to make sure it was both firmly snapped and solidly attached to the long pole.
"Every word from the kid was like a fist punching Thomas in the gut, making him feel more guilty and confused.
Please, Alby, please.
I never would’ve killed him—just lost my mind for a second.
"I swear I was just sick in the head from the Changing.
"Please, Alby," Ben pleaded, his shaky voice so pathetic that Thomas couldn’t believe it was the same guy who’d tried to bite his throat off the day before.
The Gladers looked on, not a word from any of them.
Tears glistened in his eyes; dribbles of snot oozed from his nostrils.
Thomas watched as Alby unbuttoned the collar, then wrapped it around Ben’s neck; Ben finally looked up just as the loop of leather snapped closed with a loud pop.
It was a collar.
A large button snap revealed that the loop could be opened and closed, and its purpose became obvious.
A loop of rough leather, fastened to the metal with a massive staple.
Thomas could see the strange attachment now.
Finally, Newt stepped up to Alby and handed over the end of the pole he was holding.
No answer came to him, but he felt the guilt all the same, like a disease in his blood.
How was any of this his fault?
Thomas was horrified by the whole affair—he couldn’t help feeling responsible even though he’d never done anything to provoke Ben.
A shiver ran up Thomas’s spine at the metallic scrape of the pole on the stone ground as Newt walked.
When he was finished, he grabbed something odd-shaped on one of the ends and dragged the whole thing along toward the group.
He was holding several aluminum poles, connecting the ends to make a shaft maybe twenty feet long.
Thomas followed his gaze just in time to see Newt walk though the slanted door.
theco shack to which Newt had gone.
Then he shook his head and looked tiDocward.
"You brought this on yourself, Ben," Alby said.
When they reached the crowd, they pulled Ben to his feet in front of Alby, their leader, where Ben hung his head, refusing to make eye contact with anyone.
The pale, miserable boy still made no effort to resist, letting them drag him across the dusty stone of the courtyard.
Thomas turned his focus back to Ben and the guards.
"Newt nodded, already on the move toward a small tool shed used for the Gardens; he’d clearly been waiting for the order.
"Bring out the Pole.
"Newt," Alby said in a much quieter voice; Thomas wouldn’t have heard him if he hadn’t been standing just a few feet away.
His eyes were open, and they were wide with terror.
Except for one thing.
Refusing to put his feet down or help the progress in any way, he seemed as dead as the last time Thomas had seen him.
His clothes were tattered, barely hanging on; a bloody, thick bandage covered half his head and face.
From around the far side of the Homestead, three of the bigger boys appeared, literally dragging Ben along the ground.
His arms fell to his sides as he turned, looking around the Glade for a sign of Ben, trepidation building within him as he wondered what the boy would do when he saw him.
"Bring him out!" Alby shouted, startling Thomas out of his thoughts.
Minho had been the first to exit, which made Thomas wonder if he was the Keeper of the Runners.
He stood quietly until the Runners finally came out of their building, all of them looking exhausted, their faces pinched from deep thinking.
But Thomas said nothing, standing with arms folded, waiting for the show.
With the Grievers?The other Gladers murmured their conversations in hushed tones, an intense feeling of dreadful anticipation hanging over them like a patch of thick fog.
Are they going to put him out there?
Especially since they were all standing so close to the Maze.
Though he didn’t know exactly what it meant, it certainly didn’t sound like a good thing.
It still bothered Thomas how Chuck had smiled when breaking the news about Ben being Banished.
Alby told the Runners to hurry about their business—he wanted them back out in twenty minutes.
The Runners had just returned and entered the mysterious Map Room, clanging the iron door shut; Minho had already gone in earlier.
That night, Newt and Alby gathered every last Glader at the East Door about a half hour before it closed, the first traces of twilight’s dimness creeping across the sky.
Then he turned and ran, maybe to tell someone else the exciting news.
Smiled, despite it all, despite the sinister sound of what he’d just announced.
Chuck didn’t answer; he only smiled.
And then Thomas saw perhaps the most disturbing thing he’d seen since he’d arrived at the Glade.
What does that mean?" Thomas had to ask, though he knew it couldn’t be good if Chuck thought it was worse than being dead.
""Banished?
Tonight, for trying to kill you.
"What are you talking about?" "He’s being Banished.
"Thomas squinted, confused by what Chuck had said.
Looks like Ben’ll be wishing that arrow had found a home inside his shuck brain afterall.
"So what are they gonna do with him?"                                                         "Already had a Gathering of the Keepers this morning—made a unanimous decision by the sounds of it.
Guilt consumed him when he realized how he truly felt—he’d been relieved that Ben was dead, that he didn’t have to worry about facing him again.
"Thomas rubbed his eyes.
"They threw him in it so fast, the Med-jacks had to patch him up in there.
" Chuck pointed in that direction.
It’s our jail on the north side of the Homestead.
What do you mean?""The Slammer.
"The Slammer?
"Thomas spun to face Chuck again.
"He’s locked up in the Slammer, a huge bandage covering half his head.
Thomas didn’t know what he felt most strongly: confusion, relief, fear that he’d be attacked again …"Well, so did I," Chuck said.
" He wasn’t dead?
I saw him….
"You gotta be kidding.
"Thomas turned away to stare into the forest where the sick boy had attacked him just the night before.
Baggers went to get him … arrow missed his brain … Med-jacks patched him up.
"What?""He … isn’t dead.
He jumped up to stand nose to nose with Chuck.
"All signs of fatigue catapulted out of Thomas’s system.
"Ben … Ben … he isn’t … dead.
"What?"Words slowly fell from Chuck, in between his gasps for breath.
It wasn’t until Chuck stopped right in front of him, panting to catch his breath, that he finally looked up.
Thomas rubbed his eyes and groaned; he wanted nothing in the world more than a half-hour nap.
Thomas!" the boy shrieked as he ran toward him, pumping his arms, his face lit up with excitement.
"Thomas!
He’d just felt his eyelids droop when Chuck ruined his peace and quiet.
Leaning back against the thick trunk, he wished for a breeze but didn’t get one.
He dreaded going back to work with Winston the Butcher and knew he needed to eat lunch, but he didn’t want to be near anybody for as long as he could get away with it.
Thomas found a tree in the Deadheads, one of the nicer ones on the edge of the forest with plenty of shade.
" At that Alby turned and walked away, not saying another word.
"I promise.
"Whatever," he finally said.
"Yeah, I guess, but—" "Just promise!"Thomas paused, sick of Alby and his attitude.
Not unless I want to share.
"Not until I have a solid memory, Thomas thought.
Promise me.
But if you remember anything, if something even seems familiar, you better start talking.
Ain’t got nothin’ to do with accusing nobody of nothin’.
Grow up and start thinkin’.
Then he said, "Slim it, Greenie.
So back off!"Alby leaned back slightly, stared absently at Thomas for several seconds.
"I don’t even know where I was three days ago, much less why this Minho guy would find a dead thing called a Griever.
" It felt good to put some heat into his words.
""I don’t know anything, Alby.
Something’s goin’ on and I ain’t restin’ till I figure it out.
You pop in here, then we get us a girl Newbie the next day, a crazy note, Ben tryin’ to bite ya, dead Grievers.
"But … why do you keep accusing—""Cuz it can’t be a coincidence, slinthead!
"  Thomas felt like he’d been slapped.
Drop your sissy side and start using that shuck brain if you got one.
All we care about is surviving.
This ain’t got nothin’ to do with no hate or like or love or friends or anything.
Boy, you ain’t learned nothin’ since showing up in that Box.
"Hate you?
He looked at the boy square in the face and asked, simply, "Why do you hate me so much?"The look that came over Alby’s face was indescribable—part confusion, part anger, part shock.
He didn’t know anything.
Wasn’t that the problem in the first place?
"If you know something and ain’t tellin’ me …"Thomas was sick of being accused of knowing things.
Then Alby turned to Thomas, surprising him.
He had to admit Minho did look like he deserved a rest and a bite to eat, but he wanted to learn more.
"Thomas felt a wash of disappointment.
I’m gonna go eat some of Frypan’s nasty casserole.
"I should go back out there, but screw it.
He spoke over his shoulder as he shuffled away—it looked like his whole body was in pain.
" Minho righted himself from leaning on the wall, hit Alby on the arm, then started walking toward the Homestead with a slight limp.
""Smartest thing you’ve said in a week.
"Better wait till the wake-up tomorrow.
"Alby looked at his watch.
But if you wanna haul it right now, we could probably make it there and back before the walls shut.
"Dude, I’m exhausted, starving, and sun-sick.
" "Weird?" Alby looked confused.
It’s … weird.
"You gotta see it for yourself.
"Slim it, man," Minho said.
And that maybe they should talk in private.
What in the world?—but held his tongue, not wanting to remind them he was there.
Moist skin?
Did it move at all—was its skin still moist?"Thomas was bursting with questions—Metal spikes?
Were the metal spikes in or out of its body?
"What did it look like?
"Alby persisted with the questions.
Plus, I wouldn’t touch one if you gave me a free trip out of this place.
Those things must weigh half a ton, dude.
"You been drinkin’ Frypan’s saucy -sauce?
"Well … why didn’t you bring it back with you?"Minho laughed again, a half-grunt, half-giggle.
"Alby looked out at the Maze, then back at Minho.
"A couple of miles from here, out near the Cliff.
"Yes, Alby," Minho said, his words laced with annoyance.
"You found a dead Griever," Alby repeated.
"It’s definitely never happened before, Thomas thought.
Big fat nasty one.
But trust me, I did.
"Look," Minho answered, "I wouldn’t believe me if I were you, either.
"Ain’t a good time for jokes," he said.
Had it never happened before?Alby looked like someone had just told him he could grow wings and fly.
The nasty creature was terrifying to think about, but he wondered why finding a dead one was such a big deal.
"Thomas was fascinated at the mention of a Griever.
"A dead Griever.
"A dead what?"Minho smiled.
""Huh?" Alby asked.
"I found a dead one.
The Runner balanced himself against the wall, gave both of them a cold look.
Just talk!"Thomas sat quietly in anticipation as Minho struggled to stand up, wincing with every move, his whole demeanor just screaming exhaustion.
"I don’t care what this shank hears.
"He’s fine," Alby replied.
What happened?" Minho raised his eyebrows and nodded toward Thomas.
"Okay," Alby said, "out with it.
"Alby walked up a moment later with a big plastic cup full of water and handed it to Minho, who gulped down the whole thing without stopping once for breath.
You da boss.
"Okay, Greenie.
"Minho studied him for a second.
Just make sure Alby lets me hear the news, too.
co.
"Okay, I’ll shut up.
He likediDocMnh.
" Something in his voice lessened the blow, and Thomas made his decision.
Wait for General Alby.
Patience.
I told you.
"Dude.
Minho threw his hands up.
""Why?" Thomas desperately wanted to hear about what happened out in the Maze.
Let’s just say I got a little excited and ran extra fast to get my bee-hind back here.
"Yeah, Greenie, I run out there every day.
Don’t you run out there every day?"Minho groaned as he pulled himself up and crossed his legs under him.
"Well, at least tell me why you look so tired.
He wasn’t in the least bit surprised at the non-answer.
"Thomas sighed.
Plus, he might not want you to hear it anyway.
I don’t like saying stuff twice.
Please just give me an answer!"Just wait till the fancy admiral gets back.
An answer, he thought.
""What do you mean?" Thomas dared to hope for information.
"But not today.
" He closed his eyes again.
That’s usually the dumbest shuck-faced thing you could ask a Runner.
"You know what, Greenie?
"So …," he asked cautiously, "did you find anything today?"Minho’s eyes opened wide; he focused on Thomas.
After a long pause, Thomas decided to take a chance.
" Thomas was having the hardest time figuring out if he liked Minho or not—his personality seemed to change every minute.
"Right.
If you got a thing for chicks in comas, right?" He snickered again.
"Yeah, you guess.
"Minho leaned back until he lay flat, eyes closed.
"Yeah, I guess she’s hot.
But he remembered how beautiful she was.
"She hot?"Thomas paused, not having thought of her in that way since she’d freaked out and delivered the note and her one-liner—Everything is going to change.
" He felt immediately guilty for lying—even if it was just a little lie.
Doesn’t really look familiar at all.
"I saw her.
"Thomas felt himself grow defensive.
Everybody says you probably know her or something.
"You saw the chick, right?
"Minho squinted slightly, as if he was studying Thomas.
"Guess not.
He thought of the girl and the note saying she was the last one ever.
"Guess there won’t be another Newbie, huh?"Thomas relaxed, returned to a sitting position, surprised at how easily he’d been put back at ease.
It’s too much fun—you’ll see when the next Newbie …" He trailed off, a perplexed look wrinkling his eyebrows.
I’m just playin’ with your head.
"Dude, sit down.
Minho’s hand snapped out and grabbed his arm.
"Thomas, now slightly scared of the guy but mostly fed up with his attitude, moved to get up.
Shut your hole till you know what you’re talking about.
Then, again staring straight in his eyes, said, "I was one of the first Gladers, slinthead.
"Minho looked at Thomas carefully.
"Yeah, I’m sure that’s exactly what you did as a Newbie.
He pushed himself back up onto his knees so he was looking down at the older boy.
He realized immediately he’d just made a mistake—he couldn’t let this guy think he could talk to him like that.
"Minho had looked him square in the face for the first time with that last sentence, and Thomas scooted back a few inches before he could stop himself.
That’s what I expect.
"Do what you’re told, keep your mouth shut.
co you first came, he wanted to say.
Like you were any differentiDocwhen.
" "What do you expect us to do?" Thomas felt a flush of anger.
It’s really annoying.
" Minho sighed as if bored, then muttered, almost to himself, "Why do you shanks always come in here asking stupid questions?
"So who is the leader if he isn’t?""Greenie, just shut it before you confuse yourself more.
Thomas didn’t know what to make of the conversation—it was hard to tell when Minho was joking.
" He rubbed his eyes, snickering as he did so.
There you go.
Nah, nah—Admiral Alby.
Maybe we should call him El Presidente.
"Yeah, call him leader all you want.
"Isn’t he the leader?""Leader?" Minho barked a grunt that was probably supposed to be a laugh.
"The rebuke hurt Thomas far more than it should have, considering he’d known this guy all of three minutes.
Freakin’ Newbies.
Dude, you got a lot to learn.
"You scared of that pip-squeak?
"He lets you boss him around?"Minho shrugged, then wiped fresh beads of sweat off his forehead.
Thomas turned toward Minho.
"Then, surprising Thomas even more, Alby turned and ran off, presumably to get Minho some water.
"Minho’s the only shank who can talk to me like that without getting his butt kicked off the Cliff.
"Get me some water!"Alby looked over at Thomas, who was shocked to see the slightest hint of a smile flash across his face before vanishing in a scowl.
"What happened?" "I can barely talk, shuck-face!" Minho yelled, his voice raw.
He kicked Minho in the leg—too hard to be playful.
"But Alby didn’t move.
"Make yourself useful and get me some water—I dropped my pack out there somewhere.
What happened?""Calm your wad, Alby," the Runner replied, seeming to gain strength by the second.
"What’re you doin’ back, Minho?
"Alby jogged up then, clearly upset.
You and the chick.
"Newbie.
"Oh, yeah, Thomas," he huffed.
"The Runner pushed himself up into a sitting position, his black hair matted to his skull with sweat.
"I’m Thomas—been here just a couple of days.
Probably —surely someone had told him.
Did this guy even know about the girl?
" It hit Thomas then that the Runners were out in the Maze during the day and hadn’t witnessed any of the recent events firsthand.
"Who the klunk are you?""I’m new here.
"I’m … fine," he said between breaths, then looked up.
He was conscious, but Thomas had never seen someone so exhausted.
"Hey—you okay?" The Runner’s head rested on outstretched arms as he panted, his chest heaving.
Somebody get them!"Thomas sprinted to the older boy and knelt down beside him.
"Newt!
"Alby!" he shouted.
What if—Thomas snapped out of it—the Runner obviously needed help.
What if he’d been … stung?
What if something was seriously wrong with this guy?
The boy lay in a crumpled heap, barely moving, but Thomas was frozen by indecision, afraid to get involved.
Thomas didn’t move for a few seconds.
But before he could form a sentence, the boy collapsed to the ground.
Thomas stepped forward, eager to meet him and ask questions.
Plus, based on the last couple of days, the Runner was home hours early.
Thomas stared, overcome with curiosity—he’d yet to see a Runner up close or talk to one.
He looked like he’d just run twenty miles, face red, skin covered in sweat, clothes soaked.
The Runner stopped three steps in, then bent over and put his hands on his knees, gasping for breath.
Thomas was just passing the Box when he was surprised to see someone enter the Glade from the Maze, through the West Door, to his left—an Asian kid with strong arms and short black hair, who looked a little older than Thomas.
The guy gave him the willies.
As he walked toward the East Door, he couldn’t stop picturing Winston in a dark corner of the barn, gnawing on raw pigs’ feet.
Winston had said for him to go on alone, that he’d hang around the Blood House, which was fine with Thomas.
First, his career would not be with the animals; second, he’d never again eat something that came out of a pig.
Thomas swore two things to himself as he walked away for lunch break.
He had to watch as Winston slaughtered a hog and began preparing its many parts for future eating.
The third hour was the hardest for Thomas.
Thomas found himself using the Glader terms more and more.
Klunk.
The second hour was spent actually working with the farm animals—feeding, cleaning, fixing a fence, scraping up klunk.
Luckily, he seemed to have gotten his name as a joke, because he was pretty quiet.
Wondering where the dog came from, Thomas asked Winston, who said Bark had just always been there.
The dog, a pesky black Lab named Bark, took quickly to Thomas, hanging at his feet the entire tour.
Winston showed Thomas around for the first hour, pointing out which pens held which animals, where the chicken and turkey coops were, what went where in the barn.
Maybe he was sent here for being a serial killer, he thought.
"Winston was an acne-covered kid, short but muscular, and it seemed to Thomas the Keeper liked his job way too much.
Let’s go meet Winston—he’s the Keeper.
"Oh, you’ll know good and well by the time sun sets tonight.
Newt nodded toward the barn.
" He was just joking, but Newt didn’t seem to get it.
Maybe I love killing animals.
""Too bad I can’t remember my whole life.
Slicers do anything and everything dealin’ with the beasties.
Don’t worry, cuttin’ up Frypan’s victuals ain’t but a part.
"We always make the Newbies start with the bloody Slicers.
Milk cows or slaughter some poor little pigs?"Newt laughed, a sound Thomas realized he hadn’t heard much since he’d arrived.
"So what’s first?
"Thomas looked over Newt’s shoulder at the big faded-red barn, pushing thoughts of the girl aside.
"Weird’s as good a word as any, I ’spect.
"Yeah," Newt said.
He wanted to know who she was and if he really did know her somehow.
Maybe he wouldn’t have been able to sleep for an entirely different reason.
" If it hadn’t been for the whole Ben-in-the- graveyard incident, Thomas was sure she would’ve been all he’d thought about last night.
""That was just plain weird.
She seems okay, just dead to the world for now.
coup, checking her vitals and such.
Med -jacks are spoon-feeding her whatever soups Frypan caniDocok.
"Still in a coma, sleepin’.
He wanted to know more about her, understand the odd connection he felt to her.
"So what’s the latest on that girl from yesterday?" If anything had penetrated the haze of his long morning, it had been thoughts of her.
"Thomas nodded, absently kicking a loose rock across the dusty, cracked stone floor of the Glade.
Plain and simple.
Start givin’ up.
You get lazy, you get sad.
That’s one of the reasons we run this place all nice and busylike.
"You’re as smart as you look, Tommy.
"Newt nodded, and his smile became more genuine.
Anything to get my mind off it.
"Work’s probably the best thing I could do.
Probably think I’m a slinthead shank for gettin’ you ready to work your butt off today after an episode the likes of that.
Went through the buggin’ ringer, you did.
"Can’t blame ya there.
"Newt attempted a pathetic smile.
Couldn’t sleep last night.
"Yeah, sorry.
Who did I eat it with?"Tommy, are you even listening to me?"Thomas snapped out of his daze and focused on Newt, who’d been talking for who knew how long; Thomas hadn’t heard a word of it.
When’s the last time I had a hot dog?
Hot dog, he thought.
Somewhere close by, a dog barked, making Thomas hope Frypan didn’t bring new meaning to the word hot dog.
Cows mooed, sheep bleated, pigs squealed all around him.
Despite the rough morning, he was actually excited to learn more, and for the chance to get his mind off Ben and the graveyard.
He stood with Newt in front of the barn of the Blood House, getting ready for his first training session with a Keeper.
But from what he could tell, naps were frowned upon in the giant working farm of the Glade.
Heartburn ravaged his chest.
He was so tired, his brain felt like someone had gone in and stapled it to his skull in a dozen places.
Breakfast was a blur, and an hour after it was over, Thomas couldn’t remember what he’d eaten.
The whole time, Thomas felt mopey and indifferent, his head aching, his body wanting more sleep.
Chuck had to drag Thomas out of his sleeping bag in the morning, drag him to the showers, and drag him to the dressing rooms.
He closed his eyes and forced the thoughts and dark images away and at some point he fell asleep.
But he didn’t.
He wanted to scream and kick and spit and open up the Box and jump into the blackness below.
He wanted to find Alby and punch him, for no reason whatsoever, but didn’t.
He wanted to cry, but didn’t.
Hours later, deep in the night, Thomas was still the only one awake.
Eventually, his "buddy" did doze off, and based on the rumble of snores across the Glade, so did everyone else.
" Thomas just couldn’t handle it right then.
Go to sleep.
""I’m just play—""Shut up, Chuck.
"Chuck, be glad I’m not holding Alby’s bow right about now.
"For the first time, Thomas thought Chuck’s personality had gone from mildly irritating to intolerable.
Don’t think you’re special.
It’s happened once or twice—some Griever-stung shank flipped out and attacked somebody.
"Everyone knows what happened.
"No," Thomas replied, just as he had before.
"Say something," Chuck said for the fifth time since they’d set out their sleeping bags.
Thomas knew he’d never forget those few terrible minutes in the graveyard.
Eyes opened or not, he could swear he kept hearing the moist thunk of the arrow slamming into Ben’s cheek.
Every time he closed his eyes, the monstrous image of Ben leaping at him, the boy’s face set in lunacy, filled his mind.
That night, Thomas lay staring at the sparkling sky, wondering if he’d ever sleep again.
Surely it could only get better.
All the terrible things.
And look at all the things that had happened.
One full day.
He’d now been at the Glade for roughly twenty-four hours.
And then, as if his brain were mocking him, trying to make it worse, he had a thought.
His whole body shook, and it seemed like the vomiting would never end.
He fell to his knees by one of the scraggly trees on the outskirts of the forest and threw up, retching as he coughed and spat out every last morsel of the acidic, nasty bile from his stomach.
The image of it was the last straw.
The image of Ben’s head popped into his mind, cocked at an unnatural angle, blood running down the shaft of the arrow until it collected, dripped, splattered on the ground….
He held one hand carefully over the area where he’d been bitten; the other clutched his stomach as if that would prevent what Thomas now felt was an inevitable barf.
He was limping, his ankle screaming in pain, though he had no memory of hurting it.
Thomas squeezed his eyes against the blinding light of the sun as he emerged from the woods.
What did I ever do to this kid?He looked up, wanting answers, but Alby was already gone, a trembling branch the only sign he’d ever stood there in the first place.
Thomas thought, the world tilting around him as he stared at the lifeless body.
"What just happened here?
"Baggers’ll take care of him tomorrow.
Was it his fault?"Come on," Alby said.
Was Ben dead because of him?
Thomas fought the urge to puke.
The only movement was Ben’s right pinky finger, twitching.
Black in the darkness, like oil.
The long shaft of the arrow stuck from Ben’s cheek, the blood surprisingly less than Thomas had expected, but seeping out all the same.
Thomas jumped to his feet and stumbled forward.
He made no sound.
Ben’s head snapped violently to the left, twisting his body until he landed on his stomach, his feet pointed toward Thomas.
The sickening, wet thunk of it finding a home.
The whoosh of an object slicing through the air.
There was the sound of snapping wire.
"Three!" Alby shouted.
"I’m not … I don’t even know what—"Ben screamed, a strangled gurgle of madness, and leaped into the air, slashing out with his blade.
"Ben," Thomas said, trying to make sense of it all.
" Alby’s voice was louder, filled with warning.
"Two.
But he couldn’t move; he was too mesmerized, too scared.
" "Bad, bad, bad, bad, bad …" Ben smiled; his teeth seemed to glow, greenish in the pale liDocght.
.
coThomas wanted to look away, get out of there.
"One.
He swayed back and forth, switching the knife from hand to hand, eyes glued on Thomas.
""He’s bad, he’s bad, he’s bad …," Ben was whispering now, almost chanting.
"I’m gonna count to three.
"Shut your ugly, traitorous face!" "Ben," Alby said calmly.
"Shut your face!" Ben screamed.
Better we tore each other’s guts out!""What are you talking—" Thomas began.
Better we all jumped off the Cliff!
"He’ll wanna get us out of the Maze.
""He’ll wanna take us home," Ben said.
"Right now, back your scrawny butt down and get to the Homestead.
" His hands were perfectly steady as he held the bow, almost as if he had propped it against a branch for support.
"You leave that to me and the Keepers to figure out, shuck-face.
Why did he think Thomas was bad?Alby hadn’t moved his weapon an inch, still aiming for Ben.
What did he mean, he’d seen him?
Let me gut him!"Thomas took an involuntary step backward, horrified by what Ben had said.
We have to kill him!
"I saw him—he’s … he’s bad.
""He’s not one of us!" Ben shouted.
You should’ve never left your bed.
You’re still buggin’ from the Changing.
"Thomas just got here—ain’t nothing to worry about.
"Don’t be stupid, Ben," Alby said, his voice calm as he continued to aim the arrow.
" His voice was full of madness.
"He’s the shank you wanna kill.
" He snapped his gaze back to Thomas.
Why?"If you kill me," Ben shrieked, spittle flying from his mouth, far enough to hit Thomas in the face, "you’ll get the wrong guy.
The boy had turned into a monster.
What could possibly be wrong with that kid?
"Thomas looked back at Ben, who stared viciously at Alby, his tongue darting between his lips to wet them.
"Stop right now, or you ain’t gonna see tomorrow.
"Ben," Alby repeated.
Relief flooded Thomas’s body—Alby held a large bow, an arrow cocked for the kill, pointed straight at Ben.
"Ben!"Thomas looked toward the voice, surprised to see Alby standing at the edge of the graveyard, a mere phantom in the fading light.
Thomas was filled with a queasy fear, disbelief that this was happening at all.
At some point a knife had made an appearance, gripped in his right hand.
Ben crouched, ready to spring for another attack.
His bloodshot eyes fell upon Thomas as if he were seeing his next meal.
Ropelike veins ran along his body, pulsing and green—but less pronounced than the day before.
He wore nothing but shorts, his whiter-than-white skin stretched across his bones like a sheet wrapped tightly around a bundle of sticks.
It looked as if Ben had recovered only slightly since Thomas had seen him in the Homestead.
It was Ben.
It was the sick boy.
Thomas squirmed away on his hands and feet, sucking in breaths of air, and got his first good look at the crazed attacker.
Finally the kid fell back; a sharp crack filled the air as another grave marker met its demise.
He planted the palms of his hands against his attacker’s chest and pushed, straightening his arms until his muscles strained against the struggling figure above him.
Thomas screamed, the pain like a burst of adrenaline through his blood.
Then he felt the jarring dagger of pain as the boy’s mouth found a home, bit deeply into Thomas’s shoulder.
He heard teeth snapping open and closed, a horrific clack, clack, clack.
It seemed like a monster, a horror from a nightmare, but Thomas knew it had to be a Glader, someone who’d completely lost his mind.
He pushed and swatted at his attacker, a relentless jumble of skin and bones cavorting on top of him as he tried to gain purchase.
Thomas crashed to the ground; he felt a grave marker dig into his back before it snapped in two, burning a deep scratch along his flesh.
The figure leaped into the air and was on top of him, slamming into his shoulders, gripping him with strong hands.
He saw only a flash of pale skin and enormous eyes—the haunted image of an apparition—and cried out, tried to run, but it was too late.
"Who the he—"The boy burst through the trees before Thomas could finish.
Now only a few feet away, the visitor grew louder and louder until Thomas caught a shadowed glimpse of a skinny boy limping along in a strange, lilting run.
He froze, panic overtaking him.
Instead of answering, the person gave up all pretense of stealth and started running, crashing through the forest line around the clearing of the graveyard, circling toward the spot where Thomas stood.
" He hated to admit to himself just how terrified he was.
"Seriously, this is stupid.
"Who’s out there?" he called, his voice shaky and hollow—it sounded as if he were speaking inside an insulated tunnel.
And the darkness was thick.
Coming closer.
Then another snap.
Shaking his head, he had stepped aside to read more names of the dead when another twig broke, this time straight in front of him, right behind the trees on the other side of the graveyard.
But he was also disgusted with himself for being so shallow and glib.
Thomas felt the odd urge to snicker—it seemed too ridiculous to be true.
Words were etched on the glass; Thomas could barely read them:Le t this half-shank b e a warning to all:You c an’t e sc ap e through the Box Hole .
He remembered Chuck’s story about the boy who’d tried to rappel down the dark hole of the Box after it had descended, only to be cut in two by something slicing through the air.
The tomb was smaller than usual—only the top half of the deceased person lay inside.
Completely creeped out, Thomas leaned closer to get a better look anyway, curious.
It was a window into another grave—one that had the dusty remnants of a rotting body.
He squinted, trying to make out what was on the other side, then gasped when it came into focus.
He moved through the markers until he got to a grave covered with a sheet of grimy plastic or glass, its edges slimed with filth.
It was different from the scuttling beetle that had led him to the forest, but just as odd.
A silvery glint caught his attention.
A couple of them appeared to be just as fresh as the first one he’d examined.
Thomas looked around and saw there were a dozen or so other graves.
The name was George.
Whoever it was, he must’ve been one of the first to die, because his grave looked the oldest.
Chuck annoy you to death?He stood and walked over to another cross, this one almost completely overgrown with weeds, the ground firm at its base.
What’s your story?
Stephen , Thomas thought, feeling an unexpected but detached sorrow.
It looked fresh and bore the name Stephen—the n extra small and right at the edge because the carver hadn’t estimated well how much room he’d need.
He leaned closer to the first cross.
For the first time, Thomas realized how humid it was in the woods, the damp air already beading sweat on his forehead, the backs of his hands.
Even the birds had quieted, like they’d gone to bed for the night, and the sound of insects was barely noticeable, or at least much less than normal.
The light was so dull now that he almost felt as if he were looking through black mist.
Thomas stepped up, hesitantly, to the closest one and knelt down to get a look.
Names had been carved into the wood.
The grave markers had been painted white, but by someone in an obvious hurry—gelled globs coveredthem and bare streaks of wood showed through.
Thomas could see several clumsily prepared wooden crosses poking through this growth, their horizontal pieces lashed to the upright ones with a splintery twine.
The clearing was small, maybe thirty square feet, and covered with a thick layer of leafy weeds growing close to the ground.
He’d reached the graveyard.
An icy shiver ran down his back.
He stepped around a large oak and pulled up short.
Again, no reply.
He sounded like a complete idiot.
"He winced and shook his head, hoping now that no one was there.
Well, second-newest guy.
The new guy.
Just in case, he called out, "It’s me, Thomas.
It was probably just an animal, maybe another beetle blade.
"Anybody there?" he asked again, feeling a little calmer since the noise hadn’t repeated.
Frustrating.
Once again, he remembered a tangible thing from his past, but couldn’t assign it to any specific time or place, couldn’t associate it with any other person or event.
He thought about flashlights and his memory.
He squinted, willed his eyes to work in the growing darkness, wishing he had a flashlight.
Not bothering to hide his progress, he pushed aside branches as he walked, letting them whip back to position when he passed.
Without really thinking it through, Thomas headed toward the noise he’d heard.
Nor did he hear any more sounds from that direction.
But no one answered his call.
He stayed frozen, rooted to the spot as all grew silent, except for the whistling song of a few birds in the distance.
His voice bounced off the canopy of leaves above him, echoing through the air.
"Who’s there?" Thomas yelled out, a tingle of fear shooting across his shoulders.
Another snap, this time louder, almost like someone had broken a stick over their knee.
He stilled his breath, listened.
A twig snapped somewhere to his right and he jerked his head in that direction.
As strange as it seemed, the word felt natural on his lips, like he was already morphing into a Glader.
"Shuck it," Thomas whispered, almost as a joke.
He’d lost the sucker.
It had disappeared deep within the foliage—almost as if it had never existed.
But by the time Thomas reached the tree, any sign of the creature had vanished.
Thomas had charged thirty or forty feet into the woods, dodging and ducking and losing ground with every second, when the beetle blade jumped onto a particularly large tree and scooted up its trunk.
Deeper it went, its red light glowing brighter as the surroundings darkened.
All the while, his eyes stayed riveted on the beetle blade scuttling across the forest floor.
A thick bed of leaves and fallen twigs crunched underneath him.
Reaching out, he caught hold of a branch and swung himself forward to regain his balance.
He ducked to avoid a low- hanging limb, almost falling.
Moving as fast as he could, Thomas crashed through the heavy foliage, thin branches slapping at his face.
It was somehow beautiful and creepy, all at once.
The air around him had a greenish, muted hue, as if only several minutes of twilight remained in the day.
Yet the trees were tall with sturdy trunks, packed tightly together, the canopy up above thick with leaves.
From the Glade proper, the forest didn’t look that big, maybe a couple of acres.
He couldn’t believe how quickly the light disappeared.
Thomas sprinted after the scurrying spy, and in a matter of seconds he entered the thick copse of trees and the world became dark.
Something so strange had to be investigated.
Logic told him it had to be his mind playing tricks on him, but he swore he saw the word WICKED scrawled down its rounded back in large green letters.
He caught a gleam of red light sweeping the ground in front of the creature as if it came from its eyes.
It’s how they watch us, Alby had said.
A beetle blade.
The thing was already ten feet away by the time he realized it wasn’t a rat at all—it was more like a lizard, with at least six legs scuttling the long silver torso along.
He looked down just in time to see the sun flash off something metallic—a toy rat—scurrying past him and toward the small forest.
co by a blur of movement at his feet, followed by a hurried set of clacking sounds.
He was approaching the sparse, skeletal trees in front of the denser woods when he wasiDocstartled.
Finally, he made it to the southwest quarter, near the forest.
He could only imagine how truly horrific a place like this could be if everyone went lazy and stupid.
He was impressed by how organized they must be, how hard they all must work.
As he explored the area, he realized more and more how well the Gladers kept up the place, how clean it was.
The smell wasn’t quite as nice as the crops, but still, he imagined it could’ve been a lot worse.
Their smell, their sound—they seemed very familiar to him.
As he approached, he figured he must’ve dealt with animals in his life before the Glade.
Riders would definitely be faster than Runners .
That sucks, Thomas thought.
No horses, though.
Next was the southeast corner, where shabbily built wooden fences held in several cows, goats, sheep, and pigs.
He took another deep breath of the pleasant air and pulled himself out of his thoughts—there was a lot more he wanted to see.
Not everyone here could be a jerk.
Maybe this place won’t be so bad after all , Thomas thought.
An actual smile.
One waved at him with a smile.
As he got closer, he saw that several boys were weeding and picking in the small fields.
He was almost positive the smell would bring back some sort of pleasant memory, but nothing came.
He took a deep breath, loving the fresh whiff of dirt and growing plants.
There was other stuff, too: tomatoes, lettuce, peas, a lot more that Thomas didn’t recognize.
He headed out for the northeast corner, toward the big rows of tall green cornstalks that looked ready to harvest.
Having had his tour cut short, he decided to take a walk around the Glade on his own and get a better look and feel for the place.
Any signs of a crazed girl bearing notes of doom had disappeared.
The Glade had gone back to business as usual—people working the jobs, the doors of the Box closed, sun shining down.
"He stepped out of the kitchen and into the courtyard before Chuck could offer to join him.
See ya tonight.
"Go make yourself another sandwich—I’m going exploring.
Not to mention frustrating and irritating.
He liked Chuck, but trying to have an intelligent conversation with him was impossible.
" Thomas stood up and pushed his chair back under the table.
It’s better than—""Yeah, I know, living in pile of klunk.
Chuck thought for a moment.
Please let me be wrong.
Does this seem like a vacation to you?" Oh, man, Thomas thought.
Either way, you have been sent to a prison.
You really think I did something that would send me to prison for the rest of my life?""I don’t care what you did or didn’t do.
"At the most, thirteen.
" Chuck pointed to his chest.
"I’m probably twelve years old, dude.
Nausea trickled into his chest.
Doesn’t that sound like a prison to you?" As he said it out loud, it sounded more and more possible.
We live inside a place that seems to have no way out, surrounded by bloodthirsty monster -guards.
Our memories are wiped.
"Where did that happy thought come from?""Think about it.
I mean—what if we’re murderers or something?""Huh?" Chuck looked up at him as if he were a crazy person.
"Chuck, what if we’re all criminals?
The word made him feel a rush of panic, and the spark of hope the meal had brought him fizzled with a silent hiss.
What if all of them were sentenced to live here until they died?Sentenced.
cohe remembered what Alby said about the moving walls.
ButiDocthen,.
Could the Maze really be so massively huge that even after two years they still hadn’t found a way out?
"Thomas thought about the Runners and the maps.
That’s why they’re called Runners.
Plus"—the boy rolled his eyes—"they spend most of their time running, not writing.
"Of course they do, but there’s still stuff they need to talk about and discuss and analyze and all that klunk.
It was the first thing suggesting a potential solution to their predicament.
This intrigued him more than anything else he’d heard in a while.
"But if they’re trying to make a map, don’t they have paper to write on while they’re out there?" Maps.
Thomas was confused.
"Maps?
They meet right when they get back, before they forget anything.
What’s up with the concrete building?""Maps.
"What do they do when they get back every night?
Why don’t you ask them?"Thomas ignored the sarcasm, digging deeper.
"They should be back in a few hours.
Chuck rolled his eyes dramatically, leaving no doubt as to how stupid an idea he thought that would be.
So, when do I get a shot with the Runners?" Thomas waited patiently to get some sort of actual information from Chuck.
"Alby said I’d start my trials soon with the different Keepers.
He let out a low, gurgly burp that made Thomas cringe.
" Chuck looked up from his plate, where he’d been picking at the crumbs.
"What do I have to do to become a Runner?""Not that again.
"So, Chuck," he said as he wiped his mouth with a napkin.
After his last bite, Thomas sat back in his chair.
His stomach full, his energy replenished, his mind thankful for a few moments of silence, he decided that from then on he’d quit whining and deal with things.
And he was lucky that the kid didn’t feel like talking, because despite the complete weirdness of everything that had happened within Thomas’s known reach of memory, he felt calm again.
"Thomas was able to eat the rest of his meal without another word from Chuck.
"At least the food is good.
"Oh, man," he mumbled with a full mouth.
Thomas’s stomach begged him to hurry; he picked up his sandwich and started devouring it.
The bread was thick and white, the carrots a sparkling, bright orange.
Chuck brought two plates with sandwiches and carrots over to the table.
No answer.
"What a surprise, Thomas thought.
I’ll take it.
"So where does the electricity come from?""Who cares?
This seemed a good time to bring up one of the million questions bouncing through his brain.
" Thomas looked out a window.
Just accept it and don’t think about it.
"Quit complaining.
"Chuck paused.
Somebody evil.
Somebody sent us here.
How can this be for real?
"This is crazy.
As Chuck fumbled about with dishes and things from the fridge, Thomas pulled out a wooden chair from a small plastic table and sat down.
"Thomas was relieved they were alone.
Just be glad Frypan isn’t around—he hates it when we raid his fridge.
"I’ll get you something—but I swear this is the last time.
"Take a seat," Chuck said.
It was maddening.
But again, the essential parts were missing—names, faces, places, events.
Seeing the appliances and the familiar layout made Thomas feel as if memories—real, solid memories—were right on the edge of his mind.
It seemed old and run-down but clean.
coa microwave, a dishwasher, a couple of tables.
A bigiDocven,.
" The kitchen was small but had everything one needed to make a hearty meal.
"Just get me some food.
You must be more psycho than I thought.
"Seeing that chick wig out made you hungry?
"Chuck looked up at him, his eyebrows raised.
I’m starving.
"I didn’t finish my breakfast—can we get something somewhere?
" Thomas’s stomach rumbled, interrupting his thoughts.
""Well, I guess today fits both of those categories pretty well.
"It’s when the Keepers meet—they only call one when something weird or terrible happens.
"Chuck, what’s a Gathering?"He looked proud to know the answer.
Then the leader and Newt walked off, and Thomas was relieved to see Chuck coming his way.
"He said it quietly enough that Thomas didn’t think anyone else heard, but it sounded ominous.
Call a Gathering.
"Something’s whacked.
Alby shook his head, then turned back to Newt, releasing his grip on Thomas’s shoulder.
Why are you grilling me like this?" All Thomas wanted right then was for night to fall, so he could be alone, go to sleep.
"I … no, I don’t think so.
What would that mean?"You’re sure?" Newt prodded, standing right behind Alby.
What if he did know her somehow?
" He hoped his shaky voice didn’t betray his doubts.
"Not … no, not that I remember.
Thomas hesitated before he answered.
"You ain’t never seen her before?" he asked.
As if reading his thoughts, Alby walked over and grabbed him by the shoulder.
He was already completely confused—being blamed for things only made him feel worse.
The not-so-veiled accusations thrown at him only a few minutes before proved that the others suspected something, too, but what?
This strange connection he felt wasn’t his alone.
Thomas watched all this in mute contemplation.
""Yeah," Jeff muttered; then he and Clint shuffled off to the Homestead, the girl’s body bouncing as they went, and the other Gladers finally started to talk about it, scattering as theories bubbled through the air.
I don’t care if she talks in her sleep or takes a klunk—you come tell me.
Nothin’ better happen without me knowing about it.
"Put her next to Ben’s room, and keep a watch on her day and night.
What did it all mean?Alby leaned over to look in her face once more before they carried her off.
They’d come a day apart, she seemed familiar, he had a consuming urge to become a Runner despite learning so many terrible things….
He knew that he and the girl were connected somehow.
"Thomas’s gut clenched.
"Must be something special about her or they wouldn’t have sent her here.
""Just watch her closely," Newt said.
"We can feed her soupy stuff if she doesn’t wake up soon.
"Guess we’ll have to see what she does," Jeff said to no one in particular.
"One … two … three!"They lifted her with a quick jerk, almost throwing her up in the air—she was obviously a lot lighter than they’d thought—and Thomas almost shouted at them to be more careful.
co bent in half, like a praying mantis.
"On the count of three," Jeff, the taller Med-jack, was saying, his tall frame looking iDocrdiculous.
The idea made him nervous, and he looked around, as if someone might’ve heard his thoughts.
She did seem familiar; he felt a connection to her, though it was impossible to grasp in his mind.
Thomas wished he could do more than watch—with every passing second, he doubted more and more that what he’d said earlier was true.
"His partner, Jeff, stepped over to grab her by the arms while Clint took hold of her feet.
Jeff, let’s take her to the Homestead.
Your guess is as good as mine, but I’d say she’s in a coma.
Though it’s a bit slow.
Breathing okay, normal heartbeat.
"She seems fine.
The short guy who’d been referred to as a Med-jack—Clint, if the spectator had been correct— stood up from his examination.
Nobody!"It was the first time Thomas had actually liked hearing something come out of Alby’s mouth.
"Ain’t nobody better touch her!
" He paused, turning in a slow circle as if he wanted every person to see his face.
Banished, no questions.
"If anybody touches this girl," Alby said, "you’re gonna spend the night sleepin’ with the Grievers in the Maze.
Alby’s eyes narrowed; his mouth pulled into a tight grin that didn’t look like it had anything to do with humor.
He felt sick inside.
The girl’s half dead.
"I’m next!"How can they joke around?
There were several barks of laughter.
"Who said Clint had first shot at her?" someone yelled from the crowd.
The short one was already on the ground, kneeling beside the girl, feeling for her pulse and leaning over to listen to her heartbeat.
They must be the closest thing they have to doctors.
"Med-jacks, Thomas repeated in his head, a light going off.
"You two shanks are the Med-jacks—figure it out.
"How should I know?" Alby said.
"So what do we do with her?" the taller one asked, his voice much higher pitched than Thomas expected.
Thomas could only hope they’d make some sense of everything.
The other was short and actually had gray hair already conquering the black on the sides of his head.
Two older boys were pushing their way through the crowd—one was tall with a buzz cut, his nose the size of a fat lemon.
"Med-jacks!"Thomas wondered what that word meant—he knew he’d heard it before—but then he was abruptly knocked aside.
Alby cupped his hands around his mouth.
He wasn’t sure why, but the situation made him very uneasy.
But all he did was crumple the note in his fist, veins popping from his skin as he squeezed it, and Thomas’s heart sank.
Newt stood, and Thomas hoped for an explanation, a voice of reason, a calming presence.
Contrary to their original conclusion, she was very much alive.
But no one said a word; all eyes were glued to the girl, now lying there as if asleep, her chest rising and falling with shallow breaths.
Thomas would’ve expected shouts and questions, arguments.
Newt had read the message aloud for those who couldn’t see the paper, but instead of erupting in confusion, the Gladers all stood dumbfounded.
It was as if a supernatural wind had swept through the place and sucked out all sound.
Eve r.
An odd moment of complete silence hung over the Glade.
Scrawled across the paper in thick black letters were five words: She ’s the last o ne .
Thomas moved up behind him to get a look.
With shaking hands he unfolded it, then dropped to his knees, spreading out the note on the ground.
Newt ran forward and pulled her fingers apart, grabbing the paper.
Thomas tried to swallow but his mouth was too dry.
Clutched in her hand was a wadded piece of paper.
Her right fist shot into the air as she landed, staying rigid after she grew still, pointing toward the sky.
"Thomas stared in wonder as her eyes rolled up into her head and she fell back to the ground.
"Everything is going to change.
Then she spoke one sentence—her voice hollow and haunted, but clear.
Her pink lips trembled as she mumbled something over and over, indecipherable.
Burning blue eyes darted back and forth as she took deep breaths.
Thomas didn’t move, his gaze locked on the girl, frozen in fear.
Newt gasped and jumped up, stumbling away from her.
Alby cried out and fell backward.
As she sucked in a huge breath, her eyes snapped open and she blinked, looking around at the crowd surrounding her.
"Are you—"Before Newt could finish, the girl shot up into a sitting position.
He’d had enough accusations.
"I swear she doesn’t look familiar at all," he said anyway.
He was sure he’d never seen her before—but then the slightest hint of doubt crept into his mind.
"Thomas’s mind was spinning.
"We’re not sayin’ you bloody killed the girl.
"Slim it, Greenie," Newt said.
"You don’t think I …" He couldn’t even finish the sentence.
"Then Alby’s words started to make sense and panic flared in Thomas.
Two days, two Greenies, one alive, one dead.
"Can’t be a coincidence.
Why?""Shuck it," Alby muttered, looking back down at the girl.
He met Alby’s glare evenly and answered the only way he knew how.
What could he possibly think I have to do with this?
"You’re sure?" He looked like he didn’t believe a word Thomas said, seemed almost angry.
Alby’s forehead creased.
" Thomas shifted, looked down at his feet, then back at the girl.
Any kind of feelin’ you’ve seen her before?""No.
"I meant does she look familiar at all?
""That’s not …," Alby began, then stopped with a frustrated sigh.
Except for you guys.
I don’t know anyone.
Of course I don’t know her.
"Know her?
Thomas was shocked by the question.
"You know this girl, shank?" Alby asked, sounding ticked off.
He was surprised at having such a morbid thought.
She’ll start rotting soon.
Won’t be that way for long , he thought with a queasy twist in his stomach.
It made him sick to think that way about a dead girl, but he couldn’t look away.
Silky hair, flawless skin, perfect lips, long legs.
Beautiful.
More than pretty.
co stares, concentrated on the girl; despite her paleness, she was really pretty.
Thomas, not wanting to meetiDoctheir.
He approached Newt and Alby, who both knelt beside the girl.
Thomas refused to make eye contact with any of them, afraid of looking guilty.
The boys lining the path to Newt and the girl glared at him as he walked past, as if he were responsible for the entire mess of the Maze and the Glade and the Grievers.
But he had a strange feeling that maybe he had without realizing it.
You haven’t done anything wrong .
Oh, calm it, he told himself.
He forced himself to walk forward, trying to seem innocent without acting like someone who was guilty who was trying to act innocent.
Things just kept getting worse and worse.
What did they want him for?
Thomas’s heart jumped into his throat; his hands started to sweat.
"Greenie, get over here," he said, not bothering to be polite about it.
Only a few seconds later, the group parted again, and Newt was pointing straight at Thomas.
Newt and Alby scrambled out of the Box after her, then forced their way through to the girl’s lifeless body, the crowd re-forming behind to cut them off from Thomas’s view.
But the thing that had really stood out to him was her skin: pale, white as pearls.
She looked like she could be fifteen or sixteen years old, and her hair was tar black.
Maybe five and a half feet tall, from what he could tell.
She was thin, but not too small.
But he had caught a glimpse of her before being blocked off.
Despite his own curiosity, Thomas didn’t bother trying to force his way through to get a look— the bodies were too tightly squeezed together.
The eerie silence gave him the creeps, as if they’d just opened up a recently laid tomb.
But Thomas stayed back.
Everyone immediately ran forward, forming a packed crowd around her, a palpable excitement hovering in the air.
A few grunts later and the girl’s lifeless body was dragged out, across the edge of the door and onto one of the stone blocks making up the ground of the Glade.
From deep in the shaft came Alby’s voice shouting that they were ready, and Gally and a couple of others started pulling up on the rope.
A gleam that made Thomas suddenly more scared of him than he’d been minutes earlier.
His eyes were laced with something dark—almost a sick fascination.
Thomas watched him closely.
Gally was one of the boys holding on to the ropes, ready to hoist her, Alby, and Newt out of the Box.
No one dared admit they couldn’t wait to see the girl, but Thomas assumed they were all just as curious as he was.
A mood of reserved shock had come over most of the Gladers, who were milling about with solemn faces, kicking loose rocks and not saying much at all.
"A couple of boys grabbed some ropes made from ivy vines and lowered Alby and Newt into the Box so they could retrieve the girl’s body.
"I think she’s dead.
"That’s not bloody half of it," he said, then pointed down into the Box.
Why—Newt shushed them again.
Who is she?
Hadn’t even had the chance to notice, really.
He hadn’t even thought about why the Glade only had boys, no girls.
A girl?
"A girl?""I got dibs!""What’s she look like?""How old is she?"Thomas was drowning in a sea of confusion.
Everyone started talking at once; Thomas only caught pieces here and there.
"It’s a girl," he said.
"Newt looked down in the Box one more time, then faced the crowd, gravely.
"Tell ’em, Newt.
"You shanks shut up!" Alby yelled.
There were more murmurs and another surge forward.
"How am I supposed to know?""Why don’t you just tell us what the shuck is down there, Alby?" Gally called out.
"What’s goin’ on here, Greenie?"Thomas stared back, confused, his face turning bright red, his gut clenching.
" Then, for some reason, he looked straight at Thomas.
Two years, nothing different, now this.
"Now this.
"Two Newbies in two days," he said, almost in a whisper.
"Just hold on!" "Well, what’s wrong?" someone yelled back.
"Hold on!" Alby yelled, silencing everyone.
He felt a sliver of muted fear, similar to what he’d experienced that morning when he stepped toward the window to see the Griever.
What do they see!
Thomas wondered.
What do they see down there?
A chorus of questions filled the air as everyone began pushing forward to get a look into the small opening.
"No way," he murmured, almost in a trance.
By this time, Alby had gotten a good look as well, with a similar reaction.
"Holy …," he breathed, looking around at nothing in particular.
With a sudden jerk, Newt pushed himself back into an upright position, his face scrunched up in confusion.
Thomas leaned forward as far as he possibly could, hoping to get a glance at the newcomer.
As Newt leaned over to get a better look into the Box, the faint bleating of a goat in the distance echoed across the courtyard.
Complete silence settled over the Gladers.
With a metallic scrape the doors were opened, and a puff of dust from the surrounding stone rose into the air.
Simple hook-handles were attached on both sides, and together they yanked them apart.
Thomas watched in anticipation as Newt and Alby took positions on opposite sides of the shaft doors—a crack split the metal square right down the middle.
A muffled boom announced that the bizarre elevator had arrived.
He felt sorry for whoever this new kid was, going through the same things.
Sadness washed over him, almost as if he were reliving those few terrible minutes of awakening in darkness to the memory loss.
Everyone quieted, and for the first time, Thomas noted the grinds and rattles of the rising lift, reminding him of his own nightmarish trip the day before.
Alby and Newt had reached the crowd and pushed themselves to the front, standing right over the doors that led to the Box.
He resolved to make Chuck tell him later, whether the guy wanted to or not.
Thomas almost screamed in frustration, but he kept quiet.
" Chuck held a finger to his mouth.
Is that what Gally meant by ‘being stung’?""Shh.
And what does it have to do with the Grievers?
What do you mean?
"Different?
"Thomas sensed a chance to finally have a solid answer.
When it’s over, you’re … different.
The Grievers do bad things to you, make your whole body go through something awful.
"Don’t know the details.
co doing in there with that poor Ben kid?"Chuck shrugged.
What have iDoctheybeen.
"Chuck, man, you gotta tell me what this whole Changing business is.
Seeing them brought Ben back to his mind—along with the horrific image of him writhing in bed.
They both looked exhausted.
A door closed behind them; Thomas turned to see Alby and Newt heading over from the Homestead.
"Would you shut it?" he hissed at Chuck.
Must be a friend of Gally’s, Thomas thought.
"One of the boys standing in front of them looked back over his shoulder, annoyance crossing his face.
You could take him and all his buddies.
And I bet you’re quicker.
""Yeah, but you’re smarter.
Not a good person to pick a fight with.
"Well, for one, he has a lot more allies than I do.
Thomas wanted to think he was brave enough, but that currently sounded like the worst idea in history.
"Why don’t you go ask him what his problem is?" he asked, trying to sound tough.
Chuck apparently hadn’t.
He’d lost the urge to talk after seeing Gally.
Chuck nudged Thomas with his elbow and the boys resumed their walk to the edge of the crowd, then waited in silence; any questions Thomas had were forgotten.
" And the feeling was mutual.
"Figured that out already.
""Yeah," Thomas muttered.
"He does not like you, man.
"Shuck it," Chuck said.
It was Gally, staring dead at them.
" Chuck stopped and pointed to someone in the crowd.
Hey, look.
"The supplies come up at the same time every week.
"How do you know it’s not just supplies or whatever?""The alarm doesn’t go off when that happens," Chuck answered, simply.
"As they walked over, Thomas asked the one question he hadn’t posed yet.
Klunkhead.
I can’t believe you only have to be the Greenbean for one day.
Come on, let’s go over and see who’s coming up.
"I don’t lie, Gree—uh, Thomas.
"You’re serious?"Chuck just stared back at him.
But it never came.
"Thomas waited for Chuck to laugh or smile, thinking it had to be a joke—who ever heard of someone being cut in half?
They keep him in a box to remind future kids not to be so stupid.
Cut in half like a knife through whipped cream.
I’ve seen the sucker’s bones.
""Oh, yeah, smart guy?
"I don’t believe that for a second.
""What?" Thomas laughed.
"I wasn’t here, but I heard the kid who volunteered to do it had only gone down about ten feet when something swooshed through the air and cut him clean in half.
""What do you mean?" What now?
Let’s just say that little experiment didn’t go so well.
Longest one they could possibly make.
With the ivy.
"Have you ever tried making a rope?""Yeah, they did.
Have you ever …" He paused, waiting for the interruption, but none came.
"You’re sure about the hole?
There had to be something they hadn’t tried.
"Thomas thought for a second.
"So, how long until the delivery gets here?" "Usually takes about half an hour after the alarm.
Thomas took a deep breath andlooked back toward the crowd around the hole.
Chuck was a little annoying, but there was something about him that made things seem less terrible.
" Thomas said it with a smile.
"Chuck, never wink at me again.
" Chuck winked.
"Just brilliant, that’s all.
"What are you, a mind reader or something?" He threw as much sarcasm as he could into the comment.
"Thomas paused before he replied, not wanting to be cut off again.
It goes on for a long time.
Never heard them land.
"Okay, what?""We threw some things into the hole.
"Thomas did groan this time.
"Did you—""Tried it.
"How could that be possible?
Can’t do it.
No ropes, nada.
Doors will open, but there’s just emptiness, blackness, nothing.
Can’t.
Tried what?""Going through the hole after the Box goes down.
"Man you’re hard to talk to.
"Thomas had to suppress a groan—this was getting irritating.
"I already knew that, but what about—" "Tried it.
"Thomas remembered Alby telling him that very thing.
Won’t go down until it’s completely empty.
"It won’t do it.
"Tried what?""Going down in the Box after it makes a delivery," Chuck answered.
"Wait a minute, have you guys ever—""Tried it," Chuck interrupted before Thomas could finish.
" That triggered a thought in his head as he released Chuck.
Or I’ll throw you down the hole after the Box leaves.
Thomas.
"Okay, buddy, then call me by my name.
"Thomas grabbed Chuck by the collar, joking around.
Everyone needs a buddy in this place.
"Glad that’s settled, Greenie.
The kid folded his arms, looking very satisfied.
" But truth was, he needed a friend, and Chuck would do just fine.
"Looks like you’re not giving me much choice on that one.
""Yeah, but we’re buddies, now, right?" Chuck fully laughed this time, a squeaky sort of snort.
"You’re annoying.
Thomas shot his new friend a fake glare.
" He giggled as he elbowed Thomas in the ribs, a high-pitched snicker that inexplicably made Thomas like him more.
Maybe whoever’s in charge realized you were nothing but a big mistake, sent someone to replace you.
One a month, every month, same day.
"I don’t know—guess it’s always been real regular-like.
Isn’t this how you all got here?"Chuck shrugged.
"Why is everyone freaking out?
He pointed toward the doors of the Box.
"Fine," he replied, even though nothing could’ve been further from the truth.
"How goes it, Greenbean?" Chuck asked.
Was that really just yesterday?Someone tapped him on the elbow; he looked over to see Chuck by his side again.
Yesterday?
A crowd was gathered in the middle of the courtyard around the steel doors through which Thomas was startled to realize he’d arrived just yesterday.
The alarm finally stopped after blaring for a full two minutes.
"And with that, he ran off toward the Homestead.
"Greenie, we’ve never had two Newbies show up in the same month, much less two days in a row.
"So?" Newt replied, his jaw dropping slightly.
""So?" As Thomas looked more closely at Newt, he realized that what he’d mistaken for calm was actually disbelief—maybe even excitement.
Heco paused as if expecting Thomas to be impressed.
"Means a bloody Newbie’s comin’ up in the iDocBx.
He swatted Thomas on the back.
Newt glanced over at him, then nodded and walked over, strangely calm in the middle of the chaos.
"Newt, what’s going on!" he yelled.
He spotted Newt and called to him, trying to suppress his rising fear, telling himself things would be okay, that there had to be a reasonable explanation.
But Alby didn’t answer or slow down, and as they got closer to the box Thomas could see that dozens of kids were running around the courtyard.
he wanted to scream at him.
Talk to me!
"What about it?" Thomas demanded, hurrying to catch up.
What’s going on?""The Box, shuck-face, the Box!" was all Alby said before he set off for the middle of the Glade at a brisk pace that almost looked to Thomas like panic.
"Alby!
But Thomas couldn’t stand it anymore.
"I don’t know," Alby murmured back in a distant voice.
"What’s up with that?" the boy asked, looking to Thomas for some reason.
One shouted to Alby, a short, skinny kid drenched in mud.
Thomas noticed people in the Blood House pens glancing around, apparently just as confused.
"That’s weird" was all Alby said as he scanned the Glade, squinting.
Relief flooded his chest that his tour guide didn’t seem to think the world was about to end—but even so, Thomas was getting tired of being hit by waves of panic.
"What’s going on?" Thomas asked.
The alarm clanged through the air.
Surprised.
Alby wasn’t acting scared—he appeared … confused.
But when he focused back on Alby, he stopped.
Thomas clamped his hands to his ears, looking around as the siren blared, his heart about to thump its way out of his chest.
You better not—"He was cut off by a booming, ringing alarm that sounded from all directions.
"Beetle blades—it’s how the Creators watch us.
How many times I gotta tell ya?" He paused, then let out a sigh.
"No questions till the end, shank.
Alby didn’t bother looking.
"What was that?" he asked before he could be shut down again.
Thomas pointed up at the wall.
A patch of ivy shook as the thing disappeared into it.
Startled, he reacted quickly, looking just in time to see a flash of silver.
A movement up on the left wall of the South Door caught his attention.
Despite everything he’d learned and witnessed firsthand, it called to him as much as hunger or thirst.
Deep inside he knew he had to go out there, into the Maze.
He would be a Runner.
He wanted to be a Runner.
Either way, if he’d had any doubt about what he’d told Chuck the night before, it had now completely vanished.
Hoping that he was.
Break that rule, and if you ain’t killed by the Grievers, we’ll kill you ourselves, you get me?"Thomas nodded, grumbling inside, sure that Alby was exaggerating.
Ain’t nobody—nobody—allowed in the Maze except the Runners.
Freak, that’s the Number One Rule, the only one you’ll never be forgiven for breaking.
"Why not?""You think I sent Newt to ya before the wake -up just for kicks?
"Thomas had to suppress his pride.
"Ain’t nogoin’ out there, shank.
Alby held out a hand and pushed Thomas in the chest, sent him stumbling backward.
He stepped forward, wanting to see the Maze for himself, as if the answers were printed on the walls out there.
How many had died?
The walls moved out in the Maze?
They’d been here two years?
Another stab of pain sliced through Thomas’s head—there were too many things to compute at once.
" He nodded toward the concrete-blocked building into which the Runners had disappeared the night before.
Mappin’ it out ain’t easy, ain’t easy nohow.
Shuckin’ walls move out there at night just as much as these here doors.
"Two years we’ve tried to solve this thing, no luck.
" Thomas felt his eyes widen, his heart quicken.
The few before me are already dead.
Ain’t none been here longer.
"Two years, I’ve been here.
Calm down, he chided himself, embarrassed.
He took a step backward before realizing what he was doing.
This thought gave him a chill, made him wonder if a Griever might come charging toward them at any minute.
The corridors out there looked much the same as the ones he’d seen from the window by the East Door early that morning.
Thomas stared in that direction, through the gap in the walls that served as an exit from the Glade.
" Alby jabbed a thumb over his shoulder, then paused.
"Out there’s the Maze.
He staggered back a step, awed once again by the structure of his new home, then finally returned his attention to Alby, who had his back to the exit.
He craned his neck to see the top of the walls far above; his mind spun with the odd sensation that he was looking down , not up.
The thick slabs of gray stone were cracked and covered in ivy, as ancient as anything Thomas could imagine.
Alby stopped walking, and Thomas was surprised to see they’d reached the South Door; the two walls bracketing the exit towered above them.
The secrecy was very annoying.
he wondered, irritated that Alby hadn’t answered him earlier.
What are those things?
Blinking to clear it away, he suddenly caught the red lights again, flickering and skittering about deep in the darkness of the woods.
He returned his gaze to the Deadheads, a glowing disk still floating in his vision.
It hit him that this was yet another example of the odd selective memory in his mind.
Thomas looked up, squinting to see that the sun was finally visible, though it looked odd—more orange than it should be.
Dark shadows filled the depths of the wooded area, despite the time of day.
The trees grew thicker and denser the farther back in the corner they went, more alive and full of leaves.
As they kept walking, he focused his attention on the other side of the Glade, the section Alby had called the Deadheads.
Slicer didn’t sound good at all.
If you like blood, you can be a Slicer.
Nasty.
Nasty stuff, that.
"Back there’s where the Slicers work.
Alby pointed to the large barn in the back corner, its red paint long faded to a dull rust color.
His memory loss was baffling in its complexity.
Why was stuff like that still lodged in his memory, but not where he’d seen animals before, or with whom?
Nothing about them seemed new or interesting—he knew what they were called, what they normally ate, what they looked like.
Why do I remember these animals?
Workers bustled about the area, looking as if they’d spent their whole lives on a farm.
Another pen held sheep, and there were chicken coops and turkey cages as well.
Pigs lounged in a muddy pit, an occasionally flickering tail the only sign they were alive.
Several cows nibbled and chewed at a trough full of greenish hay.
Frustrated, he turned his attention to the pens in the Blood House area.
co as he’d done so far, but willed his mouth shut.
He came as close to interruptiDocngAlby.
That disturbed him even more than not knowing some of the words Alby kept saying —words like Slopper and Bagger—that didn’t sound so good.
Why do they need a graveyard in a place full of teenagers?
Graveyard?
Thomas followed, wrinkling his nose up at the sudden smell of dirt and manure coming from the animal pens.
"Alby walked toward the South Door, located between what he’d called the Deadheads and the Blood House.
Slopper, Bricknick, Bagger, Track-hoe—somethin’ll stick, always does.
"You’ll spend the next two weeks working one day apiece for our different job Keepers—until we know what you’re best at.
" He cleared his throat, as if wanting to change subjects.
You can go there to sit and rest, hang out, whatever.
Ain’t much else.
Graveyard’s back in that corner, in the thicker woods.
"Call that the Deadheads.
Alby pointed to the southwest corner, the forest area fronted with several sickly trees and benches.
So many questions splintered his mind he couldn’t keep them straight.
"Thomas felt dizzy.
Most of us sleep outside anyway.
Ain’t pretty, but it works.
"Homestead—stupid place is twice as big than when the first of us got here because we keep addin’ to it when they send us wood and klunk.
" He pointed at the pitiful living quarters.
"Blood House—where we raise and slaughter animals.
" He pointed to the southeast corner, at the animal pens and barn.
Never rains here.
Water’s pumped in through pipes in the ground—always has been, or we’d have starved to death a long time ago.
"Gardens—where we grow the crops.
He pointed to the northeast corner, where the fields and fruit trees were located.
Alby’s eyelids fluttered briefly as he continued; he looked like he could think of a thousand things he’d rather be doing right then.
You got that?"Thomas hesitated, then shook his head, confused.
"Gardens, Blood House, Homestead, Deadheads.
" He held up his fingers as he counted off the next four words.
"Glade’s cut into four sections.
Alby kept talking, never bothering to look Thomas in the eye.
He felt such a mixture of emotions—curiosity, frustration, wonder—all laced with the lingering horror of seeing the Griever that morning.
"Thomas wondered what lay under the doors when the Box wasn’t there, but held his tongue.
Tried to send a slinthead Greenie back in the Box one time—thing wouldn’t move till we took him out.
We got all the electricity we need, grow and raise most of our food, get clothes and such.
The shanks that sent us here ain’t told us nothin’.
"Where it came from, how it gets here, who’s in charge.
"We don’t know jack about the Box, you get me?" Alby continued.
I need some tape to put over my mouth, he thought.
"Thomas nodded, his whole body itching with the desire to ask questions.
Ain’t needin’ a lot—pretty much run ourselves in the Glade.
Once a week, we get supplies, clothes, some food.
Once a month, we get a Newbie like you, never fails.
"This here’s the Box.
Alby pointed down at the doors.
He still hadn’t spotted the sun, but it looked like it was about to pop over the eastern wall at any minute.
The day had brightened considerably, the shadows stretching in the opposite direction from what Thomas had seen yesterday.
They started at the Box, which was closed at the moment—double doors of metal lying flat on the ground, covered in white paint, faded and cracked.
He walked away with Alby, hoping the Tour had officially begun.
But there was nothing he could do about it—it was time to go.
" He suddenly felt sorry for Chuck, wished people would treat the kid better.
""I’ll try.
"Have fun.
"Lots of sloppin’ to do?"Chuck rolled his eyes, then looked at Thomas.
"Ain’t you got a job, slinthead?" Alby asked.
"Ow!" Chuck shrieked.
Alby reached down and tweaked the boy’s ear.
" "Can I come?" Chuck asked from the table.
"I’ll tell ya what I wanna tell ya, Greenie.
Sharing that seemed like a very bad idea.
" He’d decided the night before not to tell anyone else how strangely familiar the place seemed, the odd feeling that he’d been there before— that he could remember things about it.
"But tell me everything—I wanna know everything.
Why did the guy have to be such a jerk?
""But …" Thomas stopped when Alby’s eyebrows shot up.
Ain’t got time to jaw with you all day.
"Ain’t no questions till the end, you get me?
" He started to move but then stopped, holding up a finger.
The Tour begins now.
"Me and you, shank.
Alby nodded.
"Enough to make me want to learn about this place," he said, hoping to avoid provoking the temper he’d seen flare in this guy the day before.
"Get a nice view out the window this morning?"Thomas stood, hoping the time for answers had come—or maybe hoping for a distraction from his gloomy thoughts.
"Ain’t you lookin’ fresh?" Alby said.
And even now, after seeing what lived in the maze?A tap on his shoulder jarred him from his thoughts; he looked up to see Alby standing behind him, arms folded.
Why did he feel that so strongly?
He was supposed to be a Runner.
But nothing about this place made any sense.
Thomas knew he was a smart kid—he somehow felt it in his bones.
Its phantom brother seemed to leap at him every time he blinked or rubbed his eyes.
How long had they been there?Try as he might to avoid it, his mind still kept wandering back to the image of the vicious Griever.
Why were they all there?
What could possibly be the purpose of such a thing?
And more importantly, why?
How could such a structure exist?
How could a maze, with walls so massive and tall, be so big that dozens of kids hadn’t been able to solve it after who knew how long trying?
He just didn’t get it; his brain was on overload trying to compute the sheer impossibility of the situation.
All he wanted was to be left alone.
The poor guy had exhausted himself trying to start a conversation with Thomas, who’d refused to respond.
He pictured them in his mind as he picked at his eggs and bacon with a fork, speaking to no one, not even Chuck, who ate silently next to him.
They’d just left without saying a word to anybody, bolting into the Maze at full speed and disappearing around corners.
The Runners.
He tried to get the image out of his head, move on to something else.
What it would be like to be attacked by something so terrible.
All he could think about was the Grievers, what their purpose could be, what they did out there during the night.
"A couple of hours later, the doors having reopened, rumbling and grumbling and shaking the ground until they were finished, Thomas sat at a worn, tilted picnic table outside the Homestead.
"Solve the buggin’ Maze and find our way home.
"Find our way out, Greenie," Newt said.
The first traces of dawn had crept up on them, and Thomas could see every detail of Newt’s face, his skin tight, his brow creased.
Newt turned to look him dead in the eye.
""And what’s that?" Thomas asked, even though he was terrified to hear the answer.
tin’co ya to survive and help us do what we’ve been sent here to do.
You’ve been sent to the Glade, Greenie, and we’ll beiDocexpe.
Now you know this isn’t joke time.
"Now you know what bloody lurks in the Maze, my friend.
Newt looked at the window absently.
It was such an odd thing to feel, especially after what he’d just seen.
Somehow he knew he had to do it.
But he had to do it.
His desire to become a Runner had taken a major blow.
"Thomas swallowed, wondering how he could ever go out there.
Be thankful for these walls.
Just be glad the Grievers only come out at night.
"Nasty bugger, eh?
"Grievers, we call ’em," Newt answered.
Something shivered in his gut, and he wondered if he’d ever be able to eat again.
"What is that thing?" he asked.
He stepped back, the courage he’d felt the previous evening melting away.
Even with the memory wipe, he felt sure he’d never seen something so truly awful.
Thomas felt an icy terror blossom in his chest, expand like a tumor, making it hard to breathe.
The creature was a horrific mix of animal and machine, and seemed to realize it was being observed, seemed to know what lay inside the walls of the Glade, seemed to want to get inside and feast on human flesh.
Wicked instrument-tipped appendages protruded from its body like arms: a saw blade, a set of shears, long rods whose purpose could only be guessed.
It was too dark to make out clearly, but odd lights flashed from an unknown source, revealing blurs of silver spikes and glistening flesh.
Thomas sucked in two huge breaths and leaned in once again.
Thomas shrieked before he could stop himself, jerked away from the window—but the thing bounced backward, leaving the glass undamaged.
It climbed the opposite wall, then leaped at the thick-glassed window with a loud thump.
A large, bulbous creature the size of a cow but with no distinct shape twisted and seethed along the ground in the corridor outside.
And when he did, he felt his breath catch in his throat, like an icy wind had blown down there and frozen the air solid.
It took a second for his eyes to focus on the moving object on the other side, to look past the grime and dust and see what Newt wanted him to see.
Thomas did, leaning forward until his nose touched the cool surface of the glass.
He gestured for Thomas to take his place and look through the window.
"Newt stepped back, still holding on to the ivy vines.
Show ya why you should never, never find your butt out there.
Show ya why them buggin’ walls close shut every night.
And we want to show ya why it’s not to be messed with.
Every lovin’ second of every lovin’ day we spend in honor of the Maze, tryin’ to solve somethin’ that’s not shown us it has a bloody solution, ya know?
"Everything we do—our whole life, Greenie—revolves around the Maze.
"Out there’s the Maze," Newt whispered, eyes wide as if in a trance.
A thick lump grew in his throat.
Thomas grew perfectly still, squinting, trying to make out what was on the other side.
Glimmers of an eerie light shone through the window; it cast a wavering spectrum of colors on Newt’s body and face, as if he stood next to a lighted swimming pool.
Then it changed.
Thomas fidgeted on his feet, wondering how Newt could stand there, perfectly patient and still, staring into nothing but darkness.
Several more.
"A minute passed, then two.
One’ll be comin’ along soon enough.
"Hold your undies, boy.
"What’re we looking for?" Thomas whispered.
coif it had been painted black.
It was dark at the moment,iDocas.
"Newt stepped forward and dug his hands into the thick ivy, spreading several vines away from the wall to reveal a dust-frosted window, a square about two feet wide.
Now shut it and let me show ya somethin’.
"I like you, Greenie.
Newt broke out in a laugh, but quickly cut it off.
"Shank," he added, throwing all the sarcasm he could into the syllable.
" Thomas paused, surprised at himself.
""Well, it’s kind of stupid to send me to a place where nothing makes sense and not answer my questions.
"When you bloody need to know, you’ll know, Greenie.
Newt stood just a couple of feet in front of the thick curtain of ivy on the wall.
The twinkling red glow of the lights held an undercurrent of warning.
"What are those?" he whispered as loudly as he dared, wondering if his voice sounded as shaky as he felt.
Thomas noticed small red lights flashing here and there along the wall’s face, moving about, stopping, turning off and on.
He stopped when Newt did, right next to the massive wall towering above them like a skyscraper—another random image that floated in the murky pool of his memory wipe.
The light was dim, but any obstructions loomed as darker shadows and he was able to make his way quickly along.
Thomas hesitated at first, wondering why he needed to run, but snapped out of it quickly and followed at the same pace.
Once they left the lawn area and stepped onto the hard gray stone of the courtyard floor, Newt broke into a run, heading for the western wall.
"Sorry," he whispered, ignoring a dirty look from Newt.
He stepped on someone’s hand, earning a sharp cry of pain in return, then a punch on the calf.
"They snuck their way through the tightly strewn pack of sleeping bodies, Thomas almost tripping several times.
And stay close.
"Where are we going?""Just follow me.
He quickly leaned over and slipped on his shoes.
He knew he should hold some suspicion, having no reason to trust anyone yet, but the curiosity won out.
"Okay," he said simply, ready to follow.
"Any lingering haze of sleep had already vanished from Thomas’s mind.
"Supposed to show ya somethin’ before the wake-up.
He reached down and helped Thomas to his feet—he was so strong it felt like he could rip Thomas’s arm off.
"Come on, Greenie," the tall boy whispered as he stood.
Thomas nodded, doing his best to say yes with his eyes, until Newt finally took his hand away, then leaned back on his heels.
He couldn’t help being curious, wondering what this boy wanted with him.
Though Thomas was surprised, any alarm melted away immediately.
Don’t wanna be wakin’ Chuckie, now, do we?"It was Newt—the guy who seemed to be second in command; the air reeked of his morning breath.
"Shh, Greenie.
Panic flared until he saw who it was.
He opened his mouth to speak but a cold hand clamped down on it, gripping it shut.
His eyes snapped open to see a too-close face staring down at him, everything around them still shadowed by the darkness of early morning.
Someone shook Thomas awake.
Sleep came much more easily than he’d expected.
sayco another word, worried he’d mess up this new sense of being encouraged, eradicate the reassuring calm that filled his heart.
But Thomas rolled over and refusediDoct.
" He heard his friend sit up, heard the intake of breath.
"Chuck, I … I think I’ve been here before.
He didn’t know what the ultimate picture would be, but his next words almost felt like they were coming from someone else.
"Then it hit Thomas—he felt like several pieces of a puzzle had been put together.
" "Go … to … sleep.
"Something out there—it feels familiar.
" But Thomas couldn’t quit.
"You’re a piece of klunk.
Have I gone completely insane?Chuck lay down with a laugh.
I don’t even know what that means.
" A Runner, Thomas thought.
""I’ll tell Alby tomorrow.
My new friend.
Newbie.
"Don’t try to—" "Thomas.
" Thomas wondered at Chuck’s reaction, but pressed on.
"You can forget that little thought right now.
"Chuck turned back and got up on his elbow.
"Thomas felt a new surge of confidence, even though he truly didn’t know what he was talking about.
"Go to sleep.
""You don’t even know what you’re talking about," Chuck grumbled, and rolled over.
"Whatever they’re doing out there, I want in.
"Runners," Thomas said, wishing he knew where this was coming from.
Thomas could hear a tinge of annoyance in his voice.
""Huh?" was the response from Chuck.
"Inside the Maze.
"I want to be one of those guys that goes out there," he said aloud, not knowing if Chuck was still awake.
But it felt … right.
The feeling—the epiphany—was a strange one, foreign and familiar at the same time.
He didn’t get it.
Not quite understanding how, he knew what he needed to do.
Ironically, the feeling that things would be okay made him slightly uneasy.
What changed?
What just happened?
He stilled, felt his eyes widen, his breathing stop for a long moment.
A warmth of calmness spread through his chest, and for the first time since he’d found himself there, he didn’t feel like the Glade was the worst place in the universe.
Comfortable.
Suddenly, the Glade, the walls, the Maze—it all seemed … familiar.
One that he didn’t expect, and he wasn’t sure from where it came.
But—like a fist had shoved it in his brain and let go—a thought popped into his head.
A few minutes passed, and Thomas felt the long day finally catch up to him, the leaded edge of sleep crossing over his mind.
Really he was just as mysterious as everything else in the Glade.
He was a quirky kid, funny, and he seemed innocent, but who was to say?
"I don’t know—I’ve only been here a month, remember?"Thomas wondered about Chuck, whether he knew more than he let on.
Chuck flopped back down with a heavy flump.
Where’d all these weird words and phrases come from, anyway?" It seemed like they’d taken some other language and melded it with his own.
Good that?""Um, yeah, good that, I guess.
"You’ll learn a lot in the next couple of days, start getting used to things.
Chuck pulled himself up to lean on an elbow, looking at Thomas.
I’m not in the mood.
" Not now, Chuck, he wanted to say.
"	"Barely.
"Well, Greenie, you survived First Day.
Chuck interrupted his thoughts.
More than anything else, perhaps, he felt … sad.
It was like looking at an image through a foot of muddy water.
But any detail that would fill in the picture to create a true and complete memory had been erased somehow.
He remembered lots of little things about life—eating, clothes, studying, playing, general images of the makeup of the world.
It was just so … weird.
It’d been one endless—and strange—day.
Sleep felt miles away, and he couldn’t shake the despair and hopelessness that coursed through his body and mind—the temporary joy of Chuck’s trick on Gally had long since faded away.
He lay in silence for the longest time, looking at the stars and listening to the soft murmurs of various conversations drifting across the Glade.
And none of the kids in the Glade had a clue, either—at least, they weren’t sharing if they did.
His mind had a hard time grasping names of places, or remembering countries or rulers, how the world was organized.
Which made him wonder for the millionth time where they were.
At least it was warm.
Thomas thought that was strange, but apparently there wasn’t enough room inside the Homestead.
It was a wide lawn that he hadn’t noticed before, and quite a few of the group chose it as their bedtime spot.
A couple of hours later, Thomas was lying in a soft sleeping bag next to Chuck on a bed of grass near the gardens.
" He felt much better.
That was awesome.
The … shank deserved it, and I don’t even know what a shank is.
"Don’t be sorry.
"What?"Thomas shook his head.
Chuck looked closely at Thomas and slowly broke into an uneasy grin.
An hour ago, he’d thought he’d never hear such a sound come out of his mouth again.
"Surprising himself, Thomas laughed.
""Sorry—if I’d known it was Gally, I never would’ve done it, I swear.
"Thanks a lot, buddy.
He turned to see Chuck standing there, staring at the ground, clearly embarassed.
He really, really hated him.
He was surprised by how much he truly hated the guy.
He couldn’t remember much, but something told him he’d never disliked someone so strongly.
"Thomas watched as the bully disappeared back into the Homestead.
"I saw you in the Changing, and I’m gonna figure out who you are.
"I know you," Gally added without looking back.
"Sorry," he muttered, wincing at how stupid it sounded.
Thomas just wanted this episode over.
You got that, Newbie?" But before Thomas could answer Gally’d already turned to walk away.
One more trick like that—I don’t care if it’s your sissy idea or not—there’ll be blood spilled.
"But you better decide right quick who you want as your friends and enemies, hear me?
" He pointed again, this time right at Thomas’s chest.
"I saw Chuck’s fat face in the window.
"I’m not a dong, Greenie," Gally spat.
He was definitely uncomfortable but not nearly as scared as a few moments earlier.
"Then how do you know there was something you didn’t do?"Thomas didn’t say anything.
He ambled up to Thomas slowly and stopped right in front of him.
"Wasn’t you?" Gally snarled.
Gally wasn’t that big—Thomas could actually take him if he hadto.
"It wasn’t me, I swear," he said, though as he stood there, he sized the boy up and realized he shouldn’t be so terrified after all.
Everything seemed to indicate that he’d be getting a fist in the face.
Thomas’s heart sank in surrender.
"Come here!" he yelled.
He immediately pointed at Thomas.
He’d just rounded the corner when Gally came screaming out of the Homestead, looking like a ferocious beast on the loose.
Thomas finally snapped out of his daze and took off after his new—and only—friend.
Thomas froze as he heard Gally open the door inside and run out of the bathroom.
"I’m gonna kill you, shuck-face!" Gally yelled, but Chuck was already off the box and running toward the open Glade.
Thomas was struck with an odd mix of horror and embarrassment.
A loud crash from inside revealed that the trick had worked—and the litany of swearwords following it let them know Gally was none too happy about it.
Without warning, Chuck suddenly popped his head up toward the window and screamed at the top of his lungs.
Thomas had to hold in a gasp when he realized it was Gally—he knew that voice already.
"Who’s that!" yelled the boy from the bathroom, his voice scratchy and laced with anger.
The angle of vision from the window protected him for the moment, but he knew he and Chuck would be seen if whoever was in there pushed his head outside to get a better look.
He just couldn’t believe he’d been suckered into playing a practical joke on somebody.
Thomas jumped to hide, pressing himself against the back of the building as hard as he could.
A shadow crossed the light; then the window slid open.
Ignoring Thomas, he reached up and tapped the window again.
"I don’t wanna get in trouble—I just got here!"Chuck suppressed a laugh by putting his hand over his mouth.
There couldn’t possibly be a worse time to play a joke— Newt or Alby could be in there.
"This is stupid," Thomas whispered.
Then he reached up with his hand and lightly tapped on the glass.
He crouched so that his head was positioned just below where the person on the inside would be able to see him.
" Chuck quietly stepped up onto a big wooden box that sat right under the window.
"Maybe I should—""Just shut your mouth and watch.
""Doing what?" Something told Thomas Chuck was up to no good.
Gives me great pleasure before bedtime.
"I love doing this to people.
"So?" A thread of unease stitched along Thomas’s skin.
"The bathroom," Chuck whispered.
Thomas heard someone moving around inside.
They tiptoed until they came upon a small, dusty window, a soft beam of light shining through onto the stone and ivy.
"Thomas let out a big breath and shrugged before following the younger boy along the back of the building.
"Just shut up and stay close.
"Chuck didn’t miss a beat.
"If you’re looking for a goodnight kiss, forget it.
Trying to grasp a sense of normalcy, he made a weak attempt at a joke.
He told himself to stop or he’d drive himself crazy.
"Where are we going?" Thomas asked, still feeling the weight of seeing those walls close, thinking about the maze, the confusion, the fear.
They ended up near the back of the Homestead—that was what Chuck called the leaning structure of wood and windows—in a dark shadow between the building and the stone wall behind it.
He did his best to suppress everything he was feeling and followed.
"Thomas knew he had no other choice.
"Trust me, when nighttime strikes, you want to be in bed.
"Come on," Chuck said, pulling at Thomas’s sleeve a second time.
Fear gripped him once again.
The thought ended his brief moment of calm, stirring in his mind a million possibilities of what might live in the maze outside, all of them terrifying.
He tried to imagine the purpose of such a thing, and he didn’t know which guess was worse—that they were being sealed in or that they were being protected from something out there.
"Thomas looked around one more time, the feel of the place completely different now that all the walls were solid with no way out.
"You kind of get used to it after a while.
"Ain’t nothin’, as Alby would say," Chuck murmured.
"Wow," he said, feeling dumb at such a monumental understatement.
A surprising sense of calm eased his nerves; he let out a long sigh of relief.
Thomas felt one final moment of trepidation, a quick slice of fear through his body, and then it vanished.
An echoing boom rumbled across the Glade as all four Doors sealed shut for the night.
He watched as the right wall reached the end of its journey, its connecting rods finding their mark and entering without a glitch.
A pang of sadness pricked through his other swirling emotions.
He tried to grasp the memory, hold on to it, complete the picture with faces, names, a place, but it faded into obscurity.
Massive stone walls, hundreds of feet high, moving like sliding glass doors—an image from his past life that flashed through his thoughts.
He tried to picture in his mind how the structure of it all worked.
Common sense won out—the maze held even more unknowns than his situation inside.
He fought the urge to run out there, slip past the moving slabs of rock before they shut, flee the Glade.
How can they do that?
Impossible, he thought.
On all four sides of the Glade, only the right walls were moving, toward the left, closing the gap of the Doors.
It felt like his head was spinning faster than his body, and his stomach flipped over with the dizziness.
He looked around at the other openings.
Thomas realized that only that wall was moving, heading for its neighbor to the left, ready to seal shut with its protruding rods slipping into the drilled holes across from it.
The crunching sound rattled his bones.
The enormous stone wall to the right of them seemed to defy every known law of physics as it slid along the ground, throwing sparks and dust as it moved, rock against rock.
He scrambled to his feet and took a few trembling steps back for a better view, finding it hard to believe what his eyes were seeing.
"It’s just the walls!"Thomas barely heard him, too fascinated, too shaken by the closing of the Doors.
"Calm down, Greenie," Chuck yelled over the noise.
An onrushing sense of claustrophobia stifled him, compressed his lungs, as if water filled their cavities.
The walls were really closing— trapping him inside the Glade.
The walls were closing.
It felt as if the whole earth shook; he looked around, panicked.
He stumbled backward, fell to the ground.
It was followed by a horrible crunching, grinding sound.
A loud boom exploded through the air, making Thomas jump.
""What?" Thomas asked, thinking it kind of strange that Chuck was suddenly acting like an adult instead of the little kid desperate for a friend he’d been only moments earlier.
hisco right ear—"it’s about to happen.
Ah"—he stopped, held up a finger, prickiDocngup.
"I think you should get to bed early—you’ll need your sleep.
"I’m not saying another word," Chuck replied, a new authority filling his voice.
"And why do you live inside a freaking maze?" He felt a rattling pressure of uncertainty, making his head splinter with pain.
What’s in that building?" He wheeled around and pointed out the East Door.
"Who are those guys and what were they doing?
Before Thomas had a chance to think, questions were rushing out of his mouth.
Someone tugged on his sleeve, breaking him from his thoughts; Chuck had come back.
Nothing developed, but something about that creepy old building gave him goose bumps, a disquieting chill.
Thomas stared, his mind churning to come up with any possible explanation for what he’d just witnessed.
They disappeared inside, pulling it shut behind them with a loud clonk.
What had they been doing out there?The big door finally popped open, and with a deafening squeal of metal against metal, the boys swung it wide.
Chuck had said something about runners earlier.
He watched, curious, as they met at the big iron door of the small building; one of the boys turned the rusty wheel handle, grunting with the effort.
There couldn’t be much good about the maze if these guys came back looking so weary and worn.
Then he realized others were entering through the remaining three Glade openings, all of them running and looking as ragged as the guy who’d just whisked by him.
Why wouldn’t people go out and search the maze?
Thomas turned as he passed, his eyes riveted to the exhausted runner, unsure why this new development surprised him so much.
He headed straight for the squat concrete building located near the Box.
Covered in sweat, his face red, clothes sticking to his body, the boy didn’t slow, hardly glancing at Thomas as he went past.
His heart skipped a beat when a boy unexpectedly appeared around a corner up ahead, entering the main passage from one of the offshoots to the right, running toward him and the Glade.
It was all so crazy it really did seem funny.
They’d wiped his memory and put him inside a gigantic maze.
As if things couldn’t have gotten any stranger.
"Looks like a maze," Thomas whispered, almost laughing to himself.
In the distance, more breaks in the walls led to other paths, and farther down, maybe a hundred yards or so away, the straight passage came to a dead end.
The ivy seemed even thicker out there.
And the walls of the corridors were similar to those that surrounded the Glade, the ground made of the same massive stone blocks as in the courtyard.
In front of him, through the East Door, he could make out passages leading to the left, to the right, and straight ahead.
A maze?
Thomas ignored him, more interested than ever in the outside of the Glade.
" He walked back toward the tree they’d just left.
I’m done.
"I’m done with you.
’"Chuck’s face reddened.
"What did you just say?""Huh?""You just called it a maze—you said, ‘same thing happens out in the maze.
"Thomas, his attention suddenly snapped up by a new detail, turned to face the younger boy.
Same thing happens out in the Maze—those walls shift every night, too.
Makes one heck of a grinding noise.
"I don’t know, they just move.
Chuck threw his arms up, clearly frustrated.
theco idea of those walls closing and trapping him inside this place they called the Glade was downright terrifying.
"And.
They’re huge, and they look like they’ve been standing here for a thousand yearsiDoc.
How could these walls move?
I figured there was a door that swung shut or a little mini-wall that slid out of the big one.
The walls really move?""What else would I have meant?"Thomas had a hard time wrapping his mind around the possibility.
"You weren’t playing with me?
"Are you kidding?" Thomas asked, the dread slamming back into his gut.
The purpose was obvious.
On the right side of the Door, foot-long rods jutted out from the wall edge, also several inches in diameter, in the same pattern as the holes facing them on the other side.
On the left side of the East Door, deep holes several inches in diameter and spaced a foot apart were bored into the rock, beginning near the ground and continuing all the way up.
The edges that bordered the vast opening were smooth, except for one odd, repeating pattern on both sides.
At least twenty feet across, the break in the wall went all the way to the top, far above.
Thomas barely heard him, shocked by how much bigger it was up close.
"This is called the East Door," Chuck said, as if proudly revealing a piece of art he’d created.
Thomas gaped, his mind emptying of thought as he saw it all firsthand.
They reached the huge split that led outside to more stone pathways.
He couldn’t see how the mammoth walls could possibly be mobile—felt so sure of it he relaxed, thinking Chuck was just playing a trick on him.
""You’re jacked in the head," Thomas muttered.
The Runners’ll be back soon; then those big walls are going to move until the gaps are closed.
"What do you mean, they close?""Just see for yourself in a minute.
He looked up, looked side to side, examined the massive slabs of stone as the uneasy feeling blossomed into outright dread.
"Thomas stopped, thinking Chuck had to have said something wrong.
And they close up every night.
"Well, they’re doors.
"I’d call them big openings," Thomas said, trying to counter his discomfort with sarcasm and disappointed that it wasn’t working.
They were only thirty feet away now.
"What do you call those big openings?" Chuck pointed up at the enormously tall gaps in the walls.
He grew uneasy and realized he’d slowed his pace, not so eager to reach the walls anymore.
" Thomas knew Chuck wasn’t just making stuff up—he knew he was missing something obvious.
I don’t see any doors.
""Doors?
"What are you talking about?" "The Doors, you shank.
"Close?" Thomas repeated.
" He already sounded out of breath.
"Be careful, those puppies are about to close.
"Whoa, wait!" Chuck cried, running to catch up.
" He needed to learn something or he was going to lose his mind.
"Well, no one said I couldn’t look around.
Thomas got to his feet and started walking toward the eastern opening.
What was wrong with these people?
That he seemed indifferent to having his life taken away from him.
"It bothered Thomas that Chuck didn’t seem to care about what he’d just said.
Half of everything.
Things are really weird around here, and most of us don’t know everything.
"Why are you guys so secretive?""That’s just the way it is.
coif he’d be getting the truth.
It only made it worse to think that even if he did get answers, he wouldn’tiDocknw.
The frustration at getting no answers from anyone was starting to grind his nerves.
"You’re hiding something," he finally replied, finishing off his last bite and taking a long swig of water.
"Thomas paused.
"Um, I’ve never been outside the Glade.
Looked uncomfortable.
"Is this part of a huge castle or something?"Chuck hesitated.
"What’s out there?" he asked, finally breaking the silence.
He felt an uncomfortable sense of vertigo looking at the towering walls, as if he hovered above them instead of sitting at their base.
Though it was hard to make out from where he sat, there was something odd about the stone edges of the exits to the outside corridors.
" He continued to eat, munching on the apples as he studied the huge breaks in the walls.
"Well, you don’t want to see him, trust me.
"Thomas could tell the boy was being less than honest but decided not to press him.
"I didn’t see him.
"Don’t really know," he muttered absently.
"Chuck glanced over at the house.
He doesn’t even look human anymore.
"What’s actually wrong with that Ben guy?
After another couple of bites, Thomas finally asked the question that had been bothering him.
" Chuck chomped into his own sandwich.
" "Told ya.
"I was starving.
"Ah, man," Thomas mumbled through a mouthful.
The wonderful tastes of ham and cheese and mayonnaise filled his mouth.
Soon, though, his hunger won out and he took a huge bite.
He did, grabbed the sandwich, but hesitated, the writhing, monstrous image of what he’d seen in the shack popping back into his mind.
"Frypan wasn’t too happy about me invading his kitchen before suppertime," Chuck said, sitting down next to the tree, motioning to Thomas to do the same.
The sense of relief that flooded through Thomas surprised him—he wasn’t completely alone in this place.
Thomas had just moved his attention to the four vast openings in the middle of the main walls of the Glade when Chuck arrived, a couple of sandwiches cradled in his arms, along with apples and two metal cups of water.
Despite what he’d just seen, Thomas didn’t know which he felt more strongly—curiosity to know what was inside, or dread at finding out.
A large round handle resembling a steel steering wheel marked the only way to open the door, just like something within a submarine.
Near that, maybe twenty feet to the south, stood a squat building made of rough concrete blocks, a menacing iron door its only entrance—there were no windows.
In the exact middle of the courtyard, the still-gaping hole of the Box lay open, as if inviting him to jump back in and go home.
The animals were in the southeast corner, mooing and crowing and baying.
The farm area, where a few workers were still picking their way through the fields, spread across the entire northeast quarter of the Glade.
At least this helped Thomas know directions—the wooden building crouched in the northwest corner, wedged in a darkening patch of shadow, the grove of trees in the southwest.
The shadows from the walls had lengthened considerably, already creeping up the sides of the ivy-covered stone faces on the other side.
He scanned the compound of the Glade, this new place of nightmares where he seemed destined to live.
Thomas leaned against the tree as he waited for Chuck.
It wasn’t cold, but Thomas shuddered once again.
Gally had called it the Changing.
The Changing.
He blinked hard several times, trying to get the image of what he’d just seen in the shack out of his mind.
A girl.
His mom, his dad, a friend, his school, a hobby.
Anything.
He wished for all the world he could remember something about his previous life.
He’d only known what it was like to be alive here for a short while and he already wanted it to end.
"Thomas was more than happy to get away from the house, and headed back toward the tree.
Ten minutes.
I’ll meet you at the same tree as before.
"Yeah, you will.
Chuck nodded.
" Not after what he’d just seen.
""I don’t know if I can ever eat again.
"But first we should get you some food from Frypan.
"You got it," Chuck replied, his voice chipper, as if thrilled to be needed.
He realized that Chuck might actually be his only friend in the world.
"Get me away from these guys," Thomas said.
Except Chuck.
He hated all of them.
Thomas hated these people.
Ignoring the gaping stares of everyone at the bottom—especially Gally—he walked out the door, pulling Chuck by the arm as he did so.
Without saying a word, he pushed past Alby and headed down the creaky steps, going as fast as he dared.
He felt like he’d shrunk to the size of a small rat.
I’ll throw you off the Cliff myself, you get me?"Thomas was humiliated and scared.
If I see you again before tomorrow morning, you ain’t reachin’ another one alive.
"Chuck’ll help you.
"Get your runtcheeks down those stairs, right now," Alby ordered.
Thomas slouched against the railing in the hallway and stared at the floor, not sure what to do next.
What was wrong with that kid?
"I … uh … want some answers," he murmured, but he couldn’t put any strength in his words—felt himself give up inside.
"What’re you doing up here, Greenie!" Alby yelled, his lips taut with anger, eyes on fireiDoc.
.
coThomas felt weak.
The image had already burned into Thomas’s mind before Alby jumped up, blocking the view but not the moans and screams, pushing Thomas out of the room, then slamming the door shut behind them.
His bloodshot eyes bulged, darting back and forth.
Purplish bruises covered the kid, red hives, bloody scratches.
Tight, rigid cords of sickly green veins webbed across the boy’s body and limbs, like ropes under his skin.
A twisted, pale figure writhing in agony, chest bare and hideous.
The look was fast—only a few seconds—but it was enough to haunt him forever.
He had to fight the bile that surged up his throat.
Thomas leaned in closer to see what the fuss was all about, but when he got a clear look at the condition of the patient, his heart went cold.
Inside the room, Newt and Alby crouched over someone lying on a bed.
He reached down, turned the brass handle, and opened the door.
"Look forward to it, shuck-face!"As if the taunting gave Thomas a sudden burst of courage, he walked over to the lit door, ignoring the creaking floorboards and laughter downstairs—ignoring the onslaught of words he didn’t understand, suppressing the dreadful feelings they induced.
"The Changing!" Gally shouted from below.
Only one door had a light coming through the crack at the bottom.
The stairs reached a landing, turned left, then came upon a railed hallway leading to several rooms.
Up he went, wincing at every splintered sound.
Each step groaned and creaked under his weight; he might’ve stopped for fear of falling through the old wood if he weren’t leaving such an awkward situation below.
He started up the stairs.
"Thomas regretted having come inside in the first place—but he did want to talk to that Newt guy.
"Go on up.
" "Go," said Gally with a sneer.
"You’re a Newbie—you can’t go up there.
"You’re not supposed to," the younger boy said.
No one made a move to stop him from doing as Gally asked, except for Chuck, who stood at the front door, shaking his head.
He felt the heat of blood in his face.
" Thomas looked around one more time, embarrassed, confused, angry.
" He pointed up again but didn’t take his eyes off Thomas.
"And stay away from me, you little slinthead.
"Just go up the stairs," Gally said.
He peered back at Thomas, hatred furrowing his brow and crinkling his monstrous nose.
A few snickers escaped the crowd, and Gally looked around, his face bright red.
" He exaggerated a salute, feeling a rush of adrenaline, as he knew he’d just crossed a line.
"Captain Gally it is.
"Okay," he said, so sick of the guy he wanted to scream, punch him in the face.
It made his stomach turn.
His breath escaped just enough for Thomas to get a whiff, reminding him of some horrible memory that was just out of reach.
Two or three were missing, and not a single one approached anything close to the color white.
" He smiled for the first time; his teeth matched his disgusting nose.
You can call me Captain Gally if you want.
Me.
I’m the real leader here, not the two geezer shanks upstairs.
And don’t let anyone fool you.
"Gally.
"What’s your name?" Thomas asked, stalling for time while he tried to decide if he should go up after all.
Losing parts of your memory didn’t make you an idiot.
But Thomas knew the kid was up to something.
"He lightly slapped Thomas’s shoulder, then stepped back, gesturing up the stairs.
I’m sorry.
Seriously, go on.
Go on upstairs and I’m sure Alby and Newt’ll fill you in.
You’re right, Tommy—I shouldn’t be so mean to Newbies.
co what?
"YiDocuknow.
Then he shook his head.
" The boy said nothing, stared at Thomas for several seconds.
"If Newt went up there, then I wanna talk to him.
Thomas tried not to think about it and pointed up the stairs, from where the moans of the sick kid echoed through the building.
Stung.
Don’t wanna get stung, do ya?"There was that word again.
"A little scared now?
Would things ever stop getting worse?"Griever got ya wettin’ yourself?" the boy said through a sneer.
Panic ate at him once again.
"Thomas refused to break eye contact but decided to say nothing.
"And I bet your first meal from Frypan that Benny’ll say he’s seen ya, too.
"He reached out and poked Thomas in the chest.
And I saw you during the Changing.
I’ve been there.
I know what old Benny baby’s going through.
"I have.
" He pointed up the stairs.
Not too many in these parts can say they’ve been stung.
"I’ve … seen you, shank.
Then his face grew serious, his eyebrows slanting inward.
And how could this kid remember him?The bully snickered, a short burst of laughter mixed with a phlegm-filled snort.
But really, how would he know?
I have no idea who you are, and I couldn’t care less," he spat.
"I’ve never seen you before in my life.
"A surge of heat pulsed through Thomas’s veins.
Something’s fishy about you showing up here, and I’m gonna find out what.
"I’ve seen you before.
" The boy wrinkled up his face, folded his arms.
""Listen to me, Greenbean.
All I want is some help.
"I don’t even know where I am.
""What’s your problem?" Thomas asked, trying to keep the fear out of his voice, trying not to think what the kid had meant by taken.
Newt and Alby won’t allow it.
"Newbies aren’t allowed to see someone who’s been … taken.
" He jerked a thumb in the direction of the upper floor.
"Hold on there, Greenie.
But the bully stepped in front of him, holding a hand up.
Without another word, he made for the stairs, only because they were close, only because he had no idea what to do or say.
" He had to get away from this guy.
Need a new diaper, shuck-face?""My name’s Thomas.
"This shank probably klunked his pants when he heard old Benny baby scream like a girl.
His nose was the size of a small fist and resembled a deformed potato.
He looked like he was fifteen or so, tall and skinny.
With a start, Thomas realized it was the black- haired guy who’d given him the look of death earlier.
Taken care of these people?"Hey, look, it’s the Greenbean," one of the older boys called out.
Had she lived here once?
He stared at the old woman in the picture.
He hadn’t thought of it yet, but he had to wonder where the electricity came from in a place like the Glade.
Flickering fluorescent lights shone from the ceiling.
The place reeked of dust and mildew—a big contrast to the pleasant smells outside.
There were even planks of wood missing from the floor.
It reminded Thomas of a haunted house from a movie or something.
The only decorations in sight were a dusty vase on a three-legged table and a black-and -white picture of an ancient woman dressed in an old-fashioned white dress.
Dark wallpaper covered the walls of the foyer and hallway, half of it peeling off.
He’d reached the door, an ugly slab of sun- faded wood, and he pulled it open to see several stoic-faced boys standing at the foot of a crooked staircase, the steps and railings twisted and angled in all directions.
But I can be your friend—""I don’t need friends," Thomas interrupted.
"I’m basically still a NewbiDoce,to.
"Nothin’ I say’ll do you any good," he said.
Chuck shrugged.
Where this sudden courage and resolve came from, he had no idea.
" He turned back toward the door, intent on going inside to find some answers.
I wouldn’t call that taking care of me.
"You can’t even tell me anything.
He turned to face Chuck.
You can count on Chuck, okay?"Thomas had almost reached the front door of the shack and the small group of boys congregating there when he was hit by a sudden and surprise rush of anger.
I’ve been here a whole month, and I know the place inside and out.
"Don’t you worry, I’ll take care of you.
Why not their last names?"Nice to meet you, Thomas," Chuck said.
Why not a friend’s name?
Why not their parents’ names?
They all remembered their names.
A common pattern to their memory losses.
If Chuck was right, he’d just discovered a link to the rest of the boys.
" He barely heard himself say it—his thoughts had spun in a new direction.
""Thomas.
You still haven’t told us—and I know you remember that much.
"What?""Your name?
Until he thought about what had caused it …"What’s your name?" Chuck asked from behind, running to catch up.
Knowing now that it was just a sick kid doing the screaming made Thomas feel better.
As he moved across the courtyard, the distinct smell of firewood and some kind of meat cooking made his stomach grumble.
It looked three or four stories high and about to fall down at any minute—a crazy assortment of logs and boards and thick twine and windows seemingly thrown together at random, the massive, ivy-strewn stone walls rising up behind it.
He stood up and walked past Chuck toward the old building; shack was a better word for the place.
"That’s nice" was all he could manage.
"Thomas looked at Chuck, unable to believe he was having this conversation.
Poo makes a klunk sound when it falls in our pee pots.
"Klunk’s another word for poo.
" He squinted, maybe anticipating Thomas’s question.
Better than living in a pile of klunk.
We live here, this is it.
I have.
You’ll be all whacked for a few days, but then you’ll get used to this place.
"Don’t worry.
"How …" He didn’t even know what to ask.
"Are you serious?" He paused, searching for words.
He felt much older than that.
He was sixteen?
Sixteen?
Thomas was so stunned he’d barely heard the last part.
" He snorted a laugh.
Oh, and ugly as fried liver on a stick.
And in case you were wondering, five foot nine … brown hair.
"I’d say you’re sixteen.
"Chuck, how … old do you think I am?"The boy scanned him up and down.
He didn’t even know his age.
Like a book completely intact but missing one word in every dozen, making it a miserable and confusing read.
He mostly remembered the workings of the world—but emptied of specifics, faces, names.
His memory loss was strange.
"Looks like you barely know more than I do," he said, but he knew it wasn’t true.
Thomas sighed in frustration and leaned back against the tree.
Chuck shrugged, then looked away, eyes rolling.
The words had a heavy weight of dread to them, and he suddenly wasn’t so sure he wanted to know what Chuck was talking about.
Grievers.
""Grievers?" Thomas was only getting more and more confused.
"Um, gettin’ stung by the Grievers.
"What hurts a lot?"  Chuck’s eyes wandered as if he wasn’t sure what to say.
" This gave Thomas pause.
Just hurts a lot.
Dead or not dead.
It’s all or nothing.
No one dies if they make it back in time to get the Serum.
""He’ll be okay.
"It sounds like someone’s dying in there.
"How can you be laughing?" Thomas asked, horrified by the noise.
Another scream came from the house, a sound like a starving animal being tortured.
" Chuck pointed at Thomas and laughed.
"Cuz you’re the newest Newbie.
"Why is everyone calling me Greenbean?" he asked, shaking Chuck’s hand quickly, then letting go.
Nothing made sense; his head hurt.
He couldn’t shake his extreme discomfort, and now annoyance crept in as well.
"This is my guide for the night?
I was the Greenbean until you showed up.
"My name’s Chuck.
He held out his hand.
""Who are They?""Better hope you never find out," the kid answered, looking far too comfortable for the situation.
""They?" Thomas didn’t like the malicious way the boy had said the word.
They got him.
"Ben’s in there, sicker than a dog.
"Don’t know," the chubby boy replied; his voice still carried the high pitch of childhood.
"What’s going on over there?" he asked, pointing at the building.
The fear was like icy dew on his skin.
Another scream, this one long and nerve-grinding, tore through the air and Thomas’s heart lurched.
" He didn’t sound comfortable saying the last word, as if he hadn’t quite grasped the slang of the Glade.
"Shank.
"Won’t hurt ya unless you’re stupid enough to touch one of them.
"A beetle what?""Beetle blade," the boy said, pointing to the top of the tree.
Thomas nodded at him.
Blue eyes shone through an otherwise pitiful face, flabby and flushed.
His brown hair hung down over his ears and neck, scraping the tops of his shoulders.
He was young—probably the youngest of any in the group he’d seen so far, maybe twelve or thirteen years old.
Thomas turned to his right to see a kid standing nearby, short and pudgy, staring at him.
"That was one of them beetle blades," someone said.
He scrambled to his feet and walked around the tree, craning his neck for a sign of whatever he’d heard, but he saw only bare branches, gray and brown, forking out like skeleton fingers—and looking just as alive.
A metallic clicking sound from the branches above grabbed his attention, made him look up; a flash of silver and red light caught his eyes just before disappearing around the trunk to the other side.
A group of boys milled around outside, glancing anxiously at the upper windows as if expecting a hideous beast to leap out in an explosion of glass and wood.
He finally forced himself to look over at the haggard building.
Thomas sat there for several moments, too overwhelmed to move.
Thomas slid down the rough face of the tree until he sat on the ground again; he shrank back against the bark and closed his eyes, wishing he could wake up from this terrible, terrible dream.
" And then he turned and headed in the direction of the building, running.
"Find Chuckie, tell him he’s in charge of your sleepin’ arrangements.
"Can’t the bloody Med-jacks handle that boy for ten minutes without needin’ my help?" He shook his head and lightly kicked Thomas on the foot.
"Shuck it," he said.
Even Newt had jumped as if startled, his forehead creasing in concern.
Thomas felt his blood turn to icy slush as he realized that the horrible sound came from the wooden building.
High and shrill, the barely human shriek echoed across the stone courtyard; every kid in sight turned to look toward the source.
"Newt had barely finished his sentence when a sudden, piercing scream ripped through the air.
Stay here, I’ll be back.
"Wee little fat shank, but nice sap when all’s said and done.
"Chuck’ll be a good fit for ya," Newt said.
A line of small-leafed weeds ran along the edge of one of the stone blocks, tiny yellow flowers peeping through as if searching for the sun, long disappeared behind the enormous walls of the Glade.
"Thomas said nothing, his head sunk, his eyes staring at the cracked, rocky ground.
Best be quiet now, accept the change—morn comes tomorrow.
"No good answers for ya, not yet, anyway.
"Done asked four questions, haven’t ya?" Newt replied.
""Is this a prison?" Thomas asked; he dug in the darkness of his thoughts, trying to find a crack to his past.
I can tell you’re not a bloody sissy.
But down the road a piece, you’ll be fightin’ true and good.
Things are bad, they are, and they’ll get much worse for ya soon, that’s the truth.
We’ve all had First Day, come out of that dark box.
"Greenie, what you’re feelin’, we’ve all felt it.
"What did I do— why’d they send me here?"Newt clapped him on the shoulder.
"What did I do?" he whispered, not really meaning for anyone to hear him.
Tears threatened again to fill his eyes, but he refused to let them come.
The language was odd, and none of the boys seemed to care whether he lived or died.
If so, why had he been sent here, and for how long?
Was it some kind of prison?
What was this place?
It was all too much—where was he?
Emptiness ate away at his insides, quickly replaced by a sadness that hurt his heart.
Thomas folded his arms, closed his eyes, took a deep breath.
Most of the kids wandered away then, each one giving Thomas a lingering look before they walked off.
"Alby turned and pushed his way through the crowd, then headed for the slanted wooden building in the corner.
New life begins tomorrow.
None of us knew jack on First Day, you neither.
You’ll be happy and helpin’.
"A few weeks, you’ll be happy, shank.
Alby’s eyes returned to Thomas, narrowing.
""Good that," Newt said.
"Get him a bed, get him to sleep.
" He turned toward Newt.
Tomorrow morning, right after the wake-up.
The Box came late today, ain’t got time for the Tour.
Night’s comin’, Runners’llbe back soon.
That’s what today is for you, shank.
"First Day.
"  "Good that," Alby said.
But he simply said, "Yeah.
Thomas fumed, wanted to punch somebody.
"Greenie, you get him, right?" He nodded again.
Everything inside him churned and hurt; the tears that had yet to come burned his eyes.
You get me?"Thomas looked over at Newt, hoping for help.
Learn the rules quick, listen, don’t talk.
Old life’s over, new life’s begun.
"Ain’t got time to be nice, Greenbean.
You’re hurtin’ more than helpin’, ya know?"Alby let go of Thomas’s shirt and stepped back, his chest heaving with breaths.
"Alby, lay off a bit.
Newt reached out and grabbed Alby by the shoulders.
Baggers’d drag you off, and you ain’t no good to us then, are ya?""I don’t even know what you’re talking about," Thomas said slowly, shocked at how steady his voice sounded.
"Whacker, if we told you everything, you’d die on the spot, right after you klunked your pants.
"No interruptions, boy!" Alby shouted.
He backed against the tree, trying to get away from Alby, who stayed right in his face.
Thomas finally got his feet under him, scared all over again.
"Get up, shank, get up!" Alby stood, pulling Thomas with him.
"How’d—"But Alby’s hand shot out before he could finish, grabbing Thomas by the shirt as he leaned forward on his knees.
That’s all you—""Who sent me here?" Thomas demanded, fear finally giving way to anger.
It’s where we live, where we eat, where we sleep—we call ourselves the Gladers.
"This place is called the Glade, all right?
Alby spread his arms out, palms up.
" There were a few scattered laughs, and then everyone gathered behind Alby and Newt, packing in even tighter, waiting to hear what they said.
"At least he can understand half my words.
"Pipe it, shuck-face," Alby grunted, pulling Newt down to sit next to him.
Veins stuck out of his muscled arms.
His hair was blond and cut long, cascading over his T-shirt.
Newt was taller than Alby too, but looked to be a year or so younger.
"Thomas reached out and shook the boy’s hand—he seemed a lot nicer than Alby.
"Name’s Newt, Greenie, and we’d all be right cheery if ya’d forgive our klunk-for-brains new leader, here.
" He bent down and extended his hand toward Thomas.
"Kid’s gonna have a buggin’ heart attack, nothin’ even been heard yet.
"Wait for the bloody Tour, Alby," he said, his voice thick with an odd accent.
"Thomas’s eyes widened, and another boy stepped up and playfully slapped Alby across the head.
"I ain’t good at this—you’re the first Greenbean since Nick was killed.
"Man," Alby said, then ran his hands over his short hair as he let out a long sigh.
"He paused, and Thomas realized his face must’ve whitened even more when he heard that last part.
Just try and avoid being killed, survive, whatever.
We don’t kill shanks like you here, I promise.
"Ain’t no way to start these conversations, you get me?
"Shuck it," Alby said, rubbing his eyes.
""The Cliff?" Thomas asked, blood draining from his face.
Act any different and I’d throw you off the Cliff because it’d mean you’re a psycho.
"If you ain’t scared," Alby said, "you ain’t human.
Heads popped up here and there, kids leaning in every direction to get a better look.
coin behind.
"Where am I?" Alby walked over to him and sat down cross-legged; the crowd of boys followed and iDocpaked.
"Seriously," he said, giving up on the show of courage.
His heart sank at the thought—he was so lost he didn’t even know his own age.
At that moment, Thomas realized with a sickening lurch that he had no idea how old he was.
His original estimate had been close—there were probably fifty to sixty of them, ranging from boys in their midteens to young adults like Alby, who seemed to be one of the oldest.
"Alby glanced at the friends closest to him, rolling his eyes, and Thomas studied the crowd again.
"Tell me the long story.
"Then tell me," Thomas called out, struggling to keep his voice even.
You won’t figure out anything if you give in to fear.
Just go with it, he thought.
But he took a deep breath and forced himself to try to accept the situation.
Panic swelled inside him once again, almost too much to bear.
Some instinct took over his actions and without saying anything he turned away from Alby and walked to a nearby tree, where he plopped down to sit with his back against the rough bark.
Thomas refused.
" He waited, clearly wanting to shake hands.
"Name’s Alby.
" He held a hand out.
Till then … just don’t break anything.
"Piece by piece, you’ll learn—I’ll be takin’ you on the Tour tomorrow.
"It’s a long story, shank," the boy said.
But other than the permanent scowl, there was nothing scary about him at all.
The dark-skinned boy had short-cropped hair, his face clean shaven.
For some reason the clothing here surprised Thomas; it seemed like everyone should be wearing something more menacing—like prison garb.
He wore normal clothes: black T-shirt, jeans, tennis shoes, a digital watch.
Suddenly the leader of the group—perhaps he was seventeen—took a step forward.
Thomas quickly looked away.
Shaken, Thomas stared at the boy’s back until he turned and took a seat.
A multicolored flag hung limply at the top of the pole, no wind to reveal its pattern.
He had black hair, and when they made eye contact, the boy shook his head and turned away, walking toward a greasy iron pole with a wooden bench next to it.
He looked so angry, Thomas wouldn’t have been surprised if the kid came at him with a knife.
One boy’s eyes, flared with hatred, stopped him cold.
He scanned their faces, taking in each expression, judging them.
Then, Why did that word pop into my head?
Captors, he thought.
Thomas looked back at his captors, feeling awkward but desperate to ask questions.
Somehow he knew that these were the smells of a farm.
Freshly turned dirt, manure, pine, something rotten and something sweet.
As he breathed in deeply, trying to settle his nerves, a mixture of smells bombarded him.
The creeping shadows of the walls didn’t reveal the time or direction—it could be early morning or late afternoon.
The sky overhead was cloudless and blue, but Thomas could see no sign of the sun despite the brightness of the day.
A large grove of trees filled the final corner; the closest ones looked crippled and close to dying.
Across the courtyard from there stood wooden pens holding sheep and pigs and cows.
Another corner of the compound held gardens—from where he was standing Thomas recognized corn, tomato plants, fruit trees.
A few trees surrounded it, their roots like gnarled hands digging into the rock floor for food.
An odd, dilapidated wooden building near one of the corners of the square contrasted greatly with the gray stone.
The floor of the courtyard looked like it was made of huge stone blocks, many of them cracked and filled with long grasses and weeds.
Hating how everyone gawked at him, heconcentrated on studying the place the boy had called the Glade.
"Keep yapping and next break’ll be cut in half!" That must be their leader, Thomas realized.
"I said shut your holes!" the dark boy yelled.
" Thomas still couldn’t see his face.
"—even do that much, bet my liver on it.
The scratchy-voiced boy was talking.
He wanted to run and hide from these people.
But laced through it all was the dark feeling of utter hopelessness, like the world had ended for him, had been wiped from his memory and replaced with something awful.
Fear.
Panic.
Curiosity.
Confusion.
Different emotions battled for dominance in his mind and heart.
It was as if his memory loss had stolen a chunk of his language—it was disorienting.
They popped out of the boys’ mouths so naturally it seemed odd for him not to understand.
Slopper .
Keeper.
Shuck.
Shank.
Thomas once again felt a pressing ache of confusion—hearing so many words and phrases that didn’t make sense.
" The kid giggled like he’d just said the funniest thing in history.
"He’s a klunk, so he’ll be a Slopper—no doubt about it.
"I told ya, shuck-face," a shrill voice responded.
" "Which Keeper he gonna get?" someone shouted from the back of the crowd.
"Just slim yourself nice and calm.
" This came from the dark-skinned boy.
"Nowhere good.
It didn’t sound quite right—higher than he would’ve imagined.
"Where am I?" Thomas asked, surprised at hearing his voice for the first time in his salvageable memory.
Countless others stared.
A dark-skinned boy frowned—the same one who’d welcomed him.
A thick, heavily muscled Asian kid folded his arms as he studied Thomas, his tight shirtsleeves rolled up to show off his biceps.
A short, pudgy boy fidgeted back and forth on his feet, looking up at Thomas with wide eyes.
A tall kid with blond hair and a square jaw sniffed at him, his face devoid of expression.
He knew he must look out of it —he felt like he’d been drugged.
Thomas focused back in on the dozens of strangers around him.
"Shut your hole, Gally," a deeper voice responded.
" Several boys laughed.
"Gonna break his shuck neck checkin’ out the new digs.
"Look at the Greenbean," a scratchy voice said; Thomas couldn’t see who it came from.
The walls had to be hundreds of feet high and formed a perfect square around them, each side split in the exact middle by an opening as tall as the walls themselves that, from what Thomas could see, led to passages and long corridors beyond.
They stood in a vast courtyard several times the size of a football field, surrounded by four enormous walls made of gray stone and covered in spots with thick ivy.
Thomas suddenly felt dizzy, his eyes flickering between the boys and the bizarre place in which he’d found himself.
There had to be at least fifty of them, their clothes smudged and sweaty as if they’d been hard at work, all shapes and sizes and races, their hair of varying lengths.
As he rotated in a slow circle, the other kids snickered and stared; some reached out and poked him with a finger.
His new companions said nothing as he swiveled his head around, trying to take it all in.
He was consumed with curiosity but still felt too ill to look closely at his surroundings.
Still dazzled by the light, he staggered a bit.
" 2The helping hands didn’t stop swarming around him until Thomas stood up straight and had the dust brushed from his shirt and pants.
"Welcome to the Glade.
"Nice to meet ya, shank," the boy said.
And Thomas knew he’d never forget the words.
The chorus of voices had grown silent, but someone spoke as they yanked him over the sharp edge of the dark box.
A storm of emotions wrenched his gut, twisted and pulled; he wanted to scream, cry, throw up.
The world seemed to spin, a swirling mist of faces and color and light.
Hands reached down, lots of hands, grabbing him by his clothes, pulling him up.
Thomas hesitated, then stepped into it with his right foot and clutched the rope as he was yanked toward the sky.
Someone lowered a rope from above, the end of it tied into a big loop.
Some of his fear melted away, but not enough to calm his racing heart.
Kids.
They were just teenagers.
Thomas didn’t know what he’d expected, but seeing those faces puzzled him.
They were boys, all of them—some young, some older.
And then, as if the lens of a camera had sharpened its focus, the faces cleared.
At first he could see only shifting shadows, but they soon turned into the shapes of bodies—people bending over the hole in the ceiling, looking down at him, pointing.
He willed his eyes to adjust as he squinted toward the light and those speaking.
The voices were odd, tinged with echo; some of the words were completely foreign—others felt familiar.
"Thomas was hit with a wave of confusion, blistered with panic.
""Ain’t no ticket back, bro.
""Dude, it smells like feet down there!""Hope you enjoyed the one-way trip, Greenie.
""You’re the klunk, shuck-face.
""How old is he?""Looks like a klunk in a T-shirt.
"Look at that shank.
He heard noises above—voices—and fear squeezed his chest.
After so long in darkness, the light stabbed his eyes; he looked away, covering his face with both hands.
A heavy grating sound revealed double sliding doors being forced open.
A straight line of light appeared across the ceiling of the room, and Thomas watched as it expanded.
A loud clank rang out above him and he sucked in a startled breath as he looked up.
"Someone … help … me!" he screamed; each word ripped his throat raw.
He felt a worrying shudder in his chest, as if his heart wanted to escape, to flee his body.
Thomas backed into the corner once again, folded his arms and shivered, and the fear returned.
He screamed, called for help, pounded on the walls with his fists.
It faded, and silence returned.
He groaned in frustration; his echo amplified through the air, like the haunted moan of death.
But there was nothing, only the cool metal.
He looked in every direction but saw only darkness; he felt along the walls again, searching for a way out.
A minute passed.
Everything fell silent.
As he scrambled to his feet, he felt the room sway less and less until it finally stilled.
With a groan and then a clonk, the rising room halted; the sudden change jolted Thomas from his huddled position and threw him across the hard floor.
He wanted to know where he was and what was happening.
Strangely enough, he felt his fear whisked away like a swarm of gnats caught in the wind, replaced by an intense curiosity.
Trusting his instincts, he knew he’d been moving for roughly half an hour.
He was smarter than that.
Minutes stretched into hours, although it was impossible to know for sure because every second seemed an eternity.
A long time passed.
The room continued its ascent, swaying; Thomas grew immune to the ceaseless rattling of the chains that pulled him upward.
He couldn’t think of one person he knew, or recall a single conversation.
Images of people flashed across his mind, but there was no recognition, their faces replaced with haunted smears of color.
He didn’t even know his last name.
And yet he didn’t know where he came from, or how he’d gotten inside the dark lift, or who his parents were.
He pictured snow on trees, running down a leaf -strewn road, eating a hamburger, the moon casting a pale glow on a grassy meadow, swimming in a lake, a busy city square with hundreds of people bustling about their business.
Knowledge flooded his thoughts, facts and images, memories and details of the world and how it works.
His mind functioned without flaw, trying to calculate his surroundings and predicament.
He didn’t understand how this could be possible.
That … that was the only thing he could remember about his life.
My name is Thomas, he thought.
He wanted to cry, but no tears came; he could only sit there, alone, waiting.
The lightless elevator swayed back and forth as it ascended, turning the boy’s stomach sour with nausea; a smell like burnt oil invaded his senses, making him feel worse.
Harsh sounds of chains and pulleys, like the workings of an ancient steel factory, echoed through the room, bouncing off the walls with a hollow, tinny whine.
With another jolt, the room jerked upward like an old lift in a mine shaft.
Sinking to the floor, he pulled his legs up tight against his body, hoping his eyes would soon adjust to the darkness.
His back struck a hard metal wall; he slid along it until he hit the corner of the room.
He fell down at the sudden movement and shuffled backward on his hands and feet, drops of sweat beading on his forehead despite the cool air.
Metal ground against metal; a lurching shudder shook the floor beneath him.
He began his new life standing up, surrounded by cold darkness and stale, dusty air.
